Title: Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration - Managed Care Program
Date: 12/14/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=657b5ca37068438055b2f4c4
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:11:01.160865
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
December 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simmonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 14, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Medical Care Programs Administration’s (MCPA) fiscal
activities with respect to the Managed Care Program (known as HealthChoice) for
the period beginning April 1, 2019 to March 31, 2022. Under HealthChoice,
MCPA makes monthly capitation payments to private Managed Care
Organizations (MCOs) to cover the cost of services provided to Medicaid
recipients. During calendar year 2022, MCPA paid providers approximately $8.2
billion for HealthChoice services, which was financed by State and federal funds.
Our audit disclosed that MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure
that ineligible costs reported by the MCOs were excluded from the capitation rate
calculation. The inclusion of such payments in the expenditure data used to
calculate the capitation rates could result in MCO capitation rates being set too
high. Claims which should be excluded from the capitation rate calculation
include denied claims and claims which were not the responsibility of the MCO,
such as claims for services carved out of the MCO contracts or for incarcerated
individuals. For example, our analysis of expenditure data in MCPA’s Medicaid
Management Information System (MMIS II) disclosed 72,000 claims, totaling
$110.2 million, that were denied because they were duplicates of a previously
submitted claim. However, MCPA did not ensure that these duplicate
expenditures were excluded from the capitation rate calculation.
In addition, MCPA’s match process to identify incarcerated individuals for
disenrollment from HealthChoice services was not comprehensive, as it did not
identify all incarcerated individuals. Incarcerated individuals generally receive
health care from the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services), and
should be removed from HealthChoice upon incarceration. Specifically, our Data

--- Page 4 ---
Analytics Unit independently obtained incarceration records from DPSCS for the
4-year period though fiscal year 2022 and, when matched to MCO HealthChoice
enrollees, identified 3,539 incarcerated individuals who were enrolled in
HealthChoice, resulting in $14 million in improper capitation payments.
Finally, MCPA did not investigate or recover potentially improper supplemental
payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries. In February 2022, MCPA reviewed
supplemental newborn delivery claims paid during calendar years 2018 through
2020 and identified 625 claims totaling $10.4 million for which MCPA could not
identify a corresponding hospital record. Our review disclosed that, as of July
2022 MCPA had not investigated these claims to determine if the individual
payments were legitimate or should be recovered from the MCOs.
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit also included a review to determine the status of four of the
five findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that MCPA
satisfactorily addressed these findings. In addition, our audit included a review to
determine the status of three of the nine findings contained in our June 2020
performance audit report on MDH’s efforts to identify and analyze improper
Medicaid payments. We determined that MDH satisfactorily addressed one of
these three findings. The other two performance audit findings we reviewed are
repeated in this report.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of MCPA, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MCPA. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and MCPA’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope 4
Ransomware Security Incident 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Capitation Rate Calculations
Finding 1 –Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) procedures 9
were not sufficiently comprehensive to ensure the validity of
Managed Care Organization (MCO) reported expenditure data used
in the capitation rate calculation.
* Finding 2 – MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure 10
that ineligible costs reported by the MCOs were excluded from the
capitation rate calculation.
Improper Medicaid Payments
* Finding 3 – MCPA did not have an effective process to identify capitation 13
payments to MCOs for incarcerated individuals, resulting in
approximately $14 million in improper payments during fiscal years
2019 to 2022.
MCO Supplemental Payments
Finding 4 – MCPA did not investigate and recover potentially improper 14
supplemental payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries totaling
$10.4 million.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 19
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of
October 2023
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) of the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) operates under both Title XIX of the federal Social
Security Act (Medicaid) and State law. Medicaid is a joint federal and state
entitlement program for low-income individuals. Each state administers
Medicaid, subject to certain state-specific coverage elections, which are then
required to provide healthcare coverage to all applicants who meet the state
program’s eligibility criteria. During fiscal year 2022, MCPA’s Medicaid
program expenditures totaled approximately $14.1 billion, including $9.3 billion
in federal fund expenditures (see Figure 1).
Figure 1
MCPA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 531 85.9%
Vacant 87 14.1%
Total 618
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 55,824,164 0.4%
Technical and Special Fees 5,339,864 0.0%
Operating Expenses 14,086,320,037 99.6%
Total $14,147,484,065
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 4,003,763,613 28.3%
Special Fund 718,980,211 5.1%
Federal Fund 9,337,698,527 66.0%
Reimbursable Fund 87,041,714 0.6%
Total $14,147,484,065
Source: State financial and personnel records
4

--- Page 7 ---
As noted in Figure 2 below, $7.4 billion of the aforementioned expenditures
related to MCPA’s Managed Care Program, known as HealthChoice. Under
HealthChoice, nine private Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) provide
medical services to Maryland Medicaid recipients. In general, MCOs contract
with and pay health care professionals and other entities (such as hospitals) to
provide these services.
According to MCPA records, as of June 30, 2022, approximately 1.5 million of
the 1.7 million Maryland Medicaid recipients1 were enrolled in MCOs (see Figure
2). MCPA makes a monthly capitation payment for each Medicaid recipient
enrolled in the MCO. The capitation rates vary by recipient based on several
factors, including the recipient’s demographics and medical history. MCPA also
reimburses the MCOs for certain high-cost activities (such as newborn deliveries).
Figure 2
MCPA Expenditures and Medicaid Recipients Count
(Fiscal Years 2015 to 2022)
Source: State accounting records, MCPA records
The scope of this audit included MCPA’s monitoring of the following services:
enrollment and disenrollment of recipients in MCOs, calculations of the MCO
capitation rates, and MCO oversight and processing of the related payments.
Separate audits are conducted of MCPA’s primary functions (such as recipient
eligibility, long-term care, and hospital services), of MCPA’s monitoring of the
Behavioral Health Administration’s Administrative Service Organization, of
MCPA’s Pharmacy Services, and the recovery of the federal share of Medicaid
program costs, which is included in our audit of MDH Office of the Secretary and
Other Units (See Exhibit 1 on page 19).
1 The increase in the number of Medicaid recipients and the related expenditures is primarily due
to Medicaid eligibility redeterminations being suspended during the COVID-19 public health
emergency.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Ransomware Security Incident
In December 2021, MDH experienced a broad security incident resulting from a
ransomware attack2. This incident affected the entire MDH computer network
and disrupted Information Technology (IT) operations for all MDH servers and
end user computers, resulting in substantial impact on all MDH business
operations including MCPA. MDH notified the Department of Information
Technology’s (DoIT) Office of Security Management, which initiated incident
response measures. Various other parties were informed of this incident or
engaged for recovery efforts. DoIT concluded that no evidence existed indicating
that sensitive or regulated information had been improperly acquired.
The incident, response measures, and related controls were subject to review as
part of our recent audit of the MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units. This
incident did not significantly impact our audit, and we were able to obtain
information needed to satisfy our audit objectives and related conclusions.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Reports
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of four of the five
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated April 22, 2020. As
disclosed in Figure 3 on the following page, we determined that MCPA
satisfactorily addressed these four findings.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of three of the nine
findings that were contained in our June 23, 2020 performance audit report of
MDH’s Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments. We
determined that MCPA satisfactorily addressed one of these three findings. The
remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
2 As defined by the federal Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MCPA – Managed Care Program
MCPA did not take follow-up action when its independent
accounting firm was unable to validate certain Managed Care
Finding 1 Not repeated
Organization (MCO) reported expenditures that were used to
calculate capitation rates.
MCPA did not verify that MCO expenditure data used in the
capitation rate calculations were accurate or ensure the rates
Finding 2 Not repeated
calculated by the State university were mathematically
accurate.
MCPA did not ensure its independent accounting firm verified
Finding 3 that MCOs were maximizing their third-party cost recovery and Not repeated
cost avoidance efforts, as required.
MCPA had not established procedures to verify the propriety of
Finding 4 supplemental payments to the MCOs for newborn deliveries Not repeated
and hepatitis C treatments.
MCPA did not consistently verify the propriety of certain labor
Not repeated
Finding 5 and overhead charges invoiced by a State university prior to
(Not followed up on)
making payments.
MDH – Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
MDH accepted encounter data from MCOs that excluded
necessary data elements and hindered its ability to perform
Finding 4 effective oversight, including the Division of Program Not repeated
Integrity’s use of data analytics to identify and analyze
improper claim activity.
MDH did not perform a data match or have an alternative
method to determine if MCOs were paying claims related to Repeated
Finding 5
certain services that MDH had carved out from the MCO (Current Finding 2)
contracts.
A data match performed by MDH to identify incarcerated
individuals who were improperly enrolled in MCOs was based
on incomplete data and was not used to identify and prevent
Repeated
Finding 8 improper fee-for-service payments related to incarcerated
(Current Finding 3)
individuals. Our expanded data match identified approximately
$9.6 million of potential improper claim payments that had not
been identified or investigated by MDH.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Capitation Rate Calculations
Background
According to Medicaid Manangement Information System (MMIS II) records, the
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) made payments to the Managed
Care Organizations (MCOs) totaling approximately $8.2 billion during calendar
year 2022, which were financed by State and federal funds. Capitation payments
accounted for approximately 95 percent ($7.8 billion) of this amount, and the
remaining $392.9 million was for supplemental payments made to MCOs for
certain high cost services (such as newborn deliveries).
The capitation rates are calculated on a calendar year basis, using the MCOs’
reported expenditures for the year that is three years prior to the year for which
rates are being calculated, and vary by recipient depending on the assigned
capitation rate category. Our review focused primarily on MCPA’s calculation of
the calendar year 2022 capitation rates, which was performed using MCO
expenditures during calendar year 2019. MCPA contracts with an independent
accounting firm to verify the MCO-reported expenditures and has an interagency
agreement with a State university to assist with the rate setting calculation (see
Figure 4 on the following page). These calculations are certified by an actuary
and then submitted to the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) for approval.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 4
Capitation Rate Calculation Overview
• MCOs report expenditures (for year that is three years prior to
year for which rates are being calculated) to MCPA.
Step 1
• MCPA uses an independe nt accounting firm to perform certain
agreed-upon procedures r eviews to validate the MCO-reported
Step 2 expenditures.
• The State university adjus ts the MCO-reported expenditure data
based on the results of the agreed-upon procedures reviews and
workCs wapitihta atnio anc Rtuaatrey Ctoa clcaulclualtaioten a Ondv ecrevrtiiefwy the capitation
Step 3
rates.
• MCPA submits the capitation rates to CMS for approval.
Step 4
Each recipient is placed in one of 62 capitation categories based on factors such as
age, demographics, and historical medical services provided. For example, for
calendar year 2022, the monthly capitation rates paid for adults without children
in Baltimore City ranged from $247 to $3,338 per recipient.
Finding 1
MCPA procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive to ensure the validty
of MCO-reported expenditure data used in the capitation rate calculation.
Analysis
MCPA procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive to ensure the validity of
MCO-reported expenditure data used in the capitation rate calculation. The
inclusion of improper or inaccurate payments in the MCO-reported expenditures
could result in increased capitation rates given that the expenditures are the most
significant component of the rate calculation. As noted in Figure 4, the MCOs
submitted a summary of their expenditures to MCPA to be used in the annual
capitation rate-setting process. MCPA primarily relied on reviews conducted by
an independent accounting firm to validate these expenditures. However, the only
review of the underlying claims data was a non-statistical sample of 25 claims for
9

--- Page 12 ---
each of the 9 MCOs (for a total of 225 test items). In addition, MCPA did not
expand testing when the firm identified deficiencies with the items tested. Rather,
MCPA simply forwarded the firm’s limited test results to the State university for
its consideration in the capitation rate calculations.
Our review of five of the firm’s reports for MCOs, which had received capitation
payments totaling $6.1 billion of the $7.8 billion during calendar year 2022,
disclosed that all five identified instances in which the amounts paid were
improper or were not accurately reported to MCPA. For example, the report for
one MCO identified deficiencies with 10 of the 25 claims tested. Since the 9
MCOs collectively reported more than 9.5 million claims in calendar year 2019,
we believe a more comprehensive method should be used to test these
transactions, instead of a non-statistical test of 225 claims. For example, MCPA
could require the accounting firm to use statistical sampling for each of the MCOs
reviewed that might potentially enable a projection of results to the entire
population of claims or certain capitation categories.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCPA develop comprehensive procedures to validate
the expenditure data used to calculate MCO capitation rates. Specifically,
we recommend that MCPA
a. develop a more comprehensive methodology to verify the propriety of
claims, such as consider whether statistical sampling could be used
during the review of MCO claims to provide results that can be projected
to the population of claims or certain capitation categories; and
b. take appropriate action, including expanding its review, when reviews of
MCO claims identify discrepancies.
Finding 2
MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that ineligible costs
reported by the MCOs were excluded from the capitation rate calculation.
Analysis
MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that ineligible costs
reported by the MCOs were excluded from the capitation rate calculation. Claims
which should be excluded from the capitation rate calculation include denied
claims and claims which were not the responsibility of the MCO, such as, claims
for carved out services3 or for incarcerated individuals. The inclusion of such
3 MCPA, rather than the MCO, is responsible for paying claims for carved-out services, such as
certain behavioral health services.
10

--- Page 13 ---
payments in the expenditure data used to calculate the capitation rates could result
in MCO capitation rates being set too high.
Denied Claims Were Not Investigated
MCPA did not ensure that the MCO-reported expenditure data, used in the rate-
setting calculation, excluded claims that were subsequently determined to be
improper. The MCOs record expenditure data in MCPA’s Medicaid Management
Information System (MMIS II), which contains numerous automated edits to
identify potential improprieties (such as duplicate claims) for further investigation
by MCPA. MCPA did not review
Figure 5
these denied claims to verify if they
Denied MCO Claims in
were improper and determine if the
MMIS II by Calendar Year
related ineligible costs were excluded
from the expenditure data submitted Claims Amount
Calendar Denied by Reported Paid
by the MCOs for capitation rate-
Year MMIS II by MCO
setting purposes. Rather, the denied
2019 13,039 $ 18,336,000
claims were forwarded by MCPA to
2020 91,247 44,989,000
the MCOs for further investigation
2021 643,491 205,788,000
without additional follow up by
Total 747,777 $269,113,000
MCPA to determine the resolution.
Source: MCPA records
Our analysis of MMIS II records disclosed approximately 748,000 claims totaling
$269.1 million reported by the MCOs between calendar year 2019 and 2021 that
were denied by MMIS II (see Figure 5). A significant portion of these claims
appeared questionable based on the stated reason the claim was denied by MMIS
II. For example, 72,000 claims totaling $110.2 million were denied because they
were duplicates of previously submitted claims; these were primarily related to
calendar year 2021 denied claims, which represented approximately 82 percent or
$90.6 million of these duplicated claims.4
Improper Payments for Carved Out Services
MCPA did not have procedures to ensure that potentially duplicated claims for
carved out services were excluded from the capitation rate calculation, resulting in
the failure to identify potentially duplicate claims totaling $6.7 million. MCPA’s
contracts with the nine MCOs excludes carved out services (such as certain
behavioral health services), which are covered directly by MCPA as fee-for-
service claims.
4 MCPA started to obtain encounter data from MCOs in fiscal year 2019 and could not readily
explain the reasons for the variances from year to year since then.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Our match5 of fee-for-service claims for carved out services, paid directly by
MCPA to other health care providers, to the claims data reported by the MCOs
during the period between January 2019 and April 2022 identified 63,000
potentially duplicate claims (paid by both the MCO and MCPA to a provider for
the same service)6, including 57,000 claims for behavioral health services. We
requested MCPA to investigate 25 of these claims for behavioral health services
totaling $114,000. MCPA determined that all 25 claims were duplicates, of
which 14 claims totaling $20,000 were improperly paid by the MCOs and the
other 11 claims were improperly paid by the Administrative Service Organization
for Behavioral Health Services.7
A similar condition was commented upon in our June 23, 2020 performance audit
report on MDH’s Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments.
MDH’s response to that report indicated that it would implement a data match to
ensure the MCOs were not paying for carved out services by June 2021.
However, during our current audit MDH management advised us that the match
had not been implemented due to MDH’s focus on the COVID-19 pandemic.
Claims Paid for Incarcerated Individuals
MCPA did not ensure that MCO-reported expenditures excluded claims for
incarcerated individuals. These individuals are not eligible for HealthChoice
while they are incarcerated; instead, their healthcare costs are generally covered
by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS). Our
comparison of the MCO-reported expenditure data for January 2019 through
April 2022 to DPSCS incarceration records8 identified $1.9 million in claims paid
by the MCOs for 309 individuals while they were incarcerated. See Finding 3
which is an additional finding related to incarcerated individuals.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA
a. review claims denied by MMIS II and ensure improper payments are
excluded from the expenditure data used in the capitation rate
calculation;
b. use available MCO data to ensure duplicate payments are not made for
services that are carved out from the MCO contracts (repeat);
5 Our match was based on a fee-for-service claim having the same date of service, recipient,
diagnosis, provider, and claim charge as the claim data reported by the MCO.
6 The MCO would have been compensated for the direct provider payment through the capitation
payments made by MCPA.
7 These payments are within the scope of our separate audit of MCPA’s Administrative Service
Organization for Behavioral Health Services.
8 We obtained incarceration records from DPSCS for use during our audit as described further in
Finding 3.
12

--- Page 15 ---
c. ensure claims paid for incarcerated individuals are excluded from the
expenditure data used in the capitation rate calculation; and
d. take corrective action to address carved out service claims that were
improperly paid, including the claims mentioned above (repeat).
Improper Medicaid Payments
Finding 3
MCPA did not have an effective process to identify capitation payments to
MCOs for incarcerated individuals, resulting in approximately $14 million in
improper payments during fiscal years 2019 to 2022.
Analysis
MCPA did not have an effective process to ensure incarcerated individuals were
disenrolled from the HealthChoice program resulting in approximately $14
million in improper capitation payments made between July 2018 and April 2022.
Individuals who are incarcerated are removed from HealthChoice because the cost
of their healthcare is generally paid by the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS)9. MCPA performed a weekly match of MCO
enrollment data to incarceration data obtained from DPSCS to identify individuals
for removal.
Our review disclosed that MCPA’s match did not identify all incarcerated
individuals. Specifically, our Data Analytics Unit independently obtained
incarceration records (including the periods of incarceration based on dates of
inmate intake, transfer, and release) from DPSCS for the 4-year period of fiscal
year 2019 to 2022.10 We then matched this data to MCO HealthChoice enrollees
and identified 3,539 incarcerated individuals who were enrolled in HealthChoice,
resulting in $14 million in improper capitation payments.
A similar condition was commented upon in our June 23, 2020 performance audit
report of MDH’s Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments.
That report noted that MDH failed to identify $7.9 million in potential improper
9 These individuals’ healthcare costs are generally paid by DPSCS. Under federal and State
regulations, incarcerated individuals are allowed to maintain Medicaid eligibility during periods
of incarceration, but are required to be disenrolled from the Managed Care Program
(HealthChoice). Typically, Medicaid only covers certain fee-for-service claims (such as
inpatient hospital care) for incarcerated individuals and payments for ineligible services should
be prevented.
10 We determined that the incarceration records we received from DPSCS was sufficiently reliable
for the purposes of our matches.
13

--- Page 16 ---
payments made from fiscal years 2016 to 2018 for individuals who were
incarcerated at the time of service. MDH was aware that it was not obtaining
certain data, such as data pertaining to the incarceration period, but advised us
that attempts to resolve the issues with DPSCS were unsuccessful. In response to
that report, MDH indicated that it would continue to work with DPSCS to obtain
complete and accurate data. However, during our current audit MDH could not
document that it made additional attempts to address the matter with DPSCS.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA
a. work with DPSCS to obtain complete and accurate incarceration data for
its match (repeat) and engage the assistance of the Department of Budget
and Management Audit Compliance Unit as necessary to resolve the
matter,
b. ensure incarcerated individuals are timely disenrolled from MCOs to
prevent improper capitation payments (repeat), and
c. investigate the potential improper payments we identified and take
corrective action (such as recovery of improper payments) (repeat).
MCO Supplemental Payments
Finding 4
MCPA did not investigate and recover potentially improper supplemental
payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries totaling $10.4 million.
Analysis
MCPA did not investigate and recover potentially improper supplemental
payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries. Supplemental newborn delivery
claims are submitted by the MCOs directly into MMIS II and are not verified by
MCPA prior to payment. According MCPA records, during calendar years 2019
through 2021, MCOs were paid for 80,000 supplemental claims totaling
approximately $1.28 billion, of which 83 percent ($1.06 billion) were for newborn
delivery claims. During calendar year 2021, supplemental payments for each
newborn delivery ranged from $12,504 to $17,279, depending on the geographic
location.
In February 2022, MCPA implemented a process to verify supplemental newborn
delivery claims and reviewed claims paid during calendar years 2018 through
2020. This review identified 625 claims totaling $10.4 million for which MCPA
could not identify a corresponding hospital record. Our review disclosed that, as
of July 2022, MCPA had not investigated these individual claims to determine if
14

--- Page 17 ---
the payments were legitimate or should be recovered from the MCOs. MCPA
management cited staff shortages, the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, and
the December 2021 ransomware security incident as reasons why the claims had
not been investigated.
At our request, MCPA investigated 20 of the aforementioned claims totaling
$305,000. MCPA determined that the MCOs could not provide adequate
supporting documentation for the newborn delivery related to 9 claims totaling
$137,000 and advised that it planned to recover these funds from the MCOs.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA
a. investigate the propriety of all potentially improper newborn delivery
supplemental claims; and
b. recover any amounts paid for improper claims, including those noted
above.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) for the period
beginning April 1, 2019 and ending March 31, 2022. The audit scope for this
audit included MCPA’s fiscal activities with respect to the Managed Care
Program (HealthChoice) and excluded the procedures and controls over MCPA’s
primary functions, the Behavioral Health Administration’s Administrative Service
Organization, and the Maryland Pharmacy Program, which are reviewed under
three separate audits (as further explained in the Background Information section
of this report).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCPA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included MCPA’s monitoring of the services provided by
its Managed Care Organizations (MCOs), enrollment and disenrollment of
Medicaid recipients in MCOs, payments to MCOs (including MCPA’s capitation
rate-setting process), and interagency agreements. We also determined the status
of four of the five findings contained in our preceding audit report and three of the
nine findings contained in our performance audit of MDH’s efforts to identify and
analyze improper Medicaid payments dated June 23, 2020.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA by MDH.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, our audit did not
include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance and programs and an assessment of
MCPA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
16

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MCPA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 1, 2019 to March 31, 2022, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MCPA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
We also extracted data from the Medicaid Management Information System (such
as MCPA and MCO claim payments) for the purpose of selecting test items and
performing data analytics. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MCPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
17

--- Page 20 ---
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MCPA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCPA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of October 2023 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director
for Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and Other
1 Disabilities 10/19/23
Units
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
2 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
Developmental Disabilities
3 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Administration
Behavioral Health Administration
 Behavioral Health Administration
and Medical Care Programs
 Medical Care Programs Administration
4 Administration - Administrative 10/25/22
Administrative Service Organization for
Service Organization for Behavioral
Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
5 10/24/22
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institute for Children and Children and Adolescents
6 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
7 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
Prevention and Health Promotion  Office of Population Health Improvement
Administration Office of Population  Office of Preparedness and Response
Health Improvement Office of  Office of Provider Engagement and
8 02/23/21
Preparedness and Response, and Regulation – Office of Controlled
Office of Provider Engagement and Substances Administration
Regulation  Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulation – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
 22 Health Professional Boards and
9 Regulatory Services Commissions 01/19/21
 The Office of Health Care Quality
19

--- Page 22 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of October 2023 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
10 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
 Kidney Disease Program
11 Pharmacy Services 08/31/20
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance
Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis
and Treatment Program
12 Spring Grove Hospital Center Spring Grove Hospital Center 04/22/20
13 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 04/10/20
14 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center 03/17/20
Medical Care Programs
15 Medical Care Programs Administration 11/07/19
Administration
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review
16 Health Regulatory Commissions Commission 04/05/19
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
17 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center 3/26/19
18 Springfield Hospital Center Springfield Hospital Center 12/6/18
19 Eastern Shore Hospital Center Eastern Shore Hospital Center 11/19/18
20

--- Page 23 ---
APPENDIX
December7,2023
Mr.Gregory A. Hook, CPA
LegislativeAuditor
Officeof LegislativeAudits
TheWarehouseatCamdenYards
351WestCamdenStreet,Suite400
Baltimore,MD 21201
DearMr.Hook:
Enclosed,pleasefindtheresponses tothedraftauditreportontheMarylandDepartmentof
Health–MedicalCarePrograms Administration–ManagedCareProgramfor theperiod
beginningApril1,2019toMarch31,2022.
If you haveanyquestions,pleasecontactFrederickD. Doggettat410-767-0885 or emailat
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
LauraHerreraScott,M.D., Secretary
MarylandDepartmentof Health
Enclosures
cc: ErinK. McMullen,R.N., Chiefof Staff, MDH
MarieGrant,AssistantSecretaryfor HealthPolicy,MDH
RyanB.Moran, Dr.P.H., DeputySecretary,HealthCareFinancing,MDH
TriciaRoddy,DeputyDirector,Medicaid,MDH
FrederickD. Doggett,Director,InternalControls,AuditCompliance&Information
Security, MDH
DeneenToney,DeputyDirector,Audit&Compliance,MDH
WarrenWaters,Jr.,Chiefof Staff, HealthCareFinancing,MDH

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
Capitation Rate Calculations
Finding 1
MCPA procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive to ensure the validity of MCO-
reported expenditure data used in the capitation rate calculation.
We recommend that MCPA develop comprehensive procedures to validate the expenditure
data used to calculate MCO capitation rates. Specifically, we recommend that MCPA
a. develop a more comprehensive methodology to verify the propriety of claims, such as
consider whether statistical sampling could be used during the review of MCO claims to
provide results that can be projected to the population of claims or certain capitation
categories; and
b. take appropriate action, including expanding its review, when reviews of MCO claims
identify discrepancies.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Beginning with calendar year 2019 data, MCPA has engaged an
additional comments as independent accounting firm to conduct a subsequent, stand-alone claims
deemed necessary. processing agreed upon procedures review on an annual basis. For CY
2019, 300 claims from each MCO were sampled. For subsequent years,
there were various tiers an MCO could fall within for the subsequent
review based upon the results of the 25 claims mentioned in the report.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/24
Please provide details of MDH agrees to develop comprehensive procedures to validate the
corrective action or expenditures data used to calculate MCO capitation rate. More
explain disagreement. specifically, MDH will work with the contracted independent accounting
firm to implement changes to the review of MCO financial reports,
including studying the question of whether statistical sampling can be
incorporated efficiently and cost-effectively to provide results that can
be projected to the population of claims or certain capitation categories.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH agrees to take appropriate action, including expanding its review,
corrective action or when reviews of MCO claims identify discrepancies. In addition, we
explain disagreement. will work with the contracted independent accounting firm to implement
changes to the review of MCO financial reports to lessen the cycle time
between initial HFMR reviews and any subsequent additional claims
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
reviews so that timely action can be taken on the results of those
reviews.
Finding 2
MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that ineligible costs reported by
the MCOs were excluded from the capitation rate calculation.
We recommend that MCPA
a. review claims denied by MMIS II and ensure improper payments are excluded from
the expenditure data used in the capitation rate calculation;
b. use available MCO data to ensure duplicate payments are not made for services that
are carved out from the MCO contracts (repeat);
c. ensure claims paid for incarcerated individuals are excluded from the expenditure data
used in the capitation rate calculation; and
d. take corrective action to address carved out service claims that were improperly paid,
including the claims mentioned above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/24
Please provide details of MCPA agrees to review claims denied by MMIS II and ensure improper
corrective action or payments are excluded from the expenditure data used in the capitation
explain disagreement. rate calculation.
MCO encounters are used in the capitation rate setting process solely for
determining service utilization and risk adjustment, not overall
capitation rates. Instead, MCOs’ financials as reported on the
HealthChoice Financial Monitoring Report (HFMR) are used. The
HFMR is audited. MDH has established a workgroup with MCOs to
clearly identify costs that should not be reported on the HFMR. For
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
instance, noncovered benefits or duplicate claims should not be reported
on the HFMR.
However, if a covered benefit was provided, but failed to be accepted by
MMIS because there was a missing provider number, those costs should
be included. These missing costs could jeopardize the actuarial
soundness of the capitation rates. MDH will be developing the oversight
mechanisms to determine how to monitor these encounters and costs.
MDH will continue to work on policies to improve the encounter data
submission processes to reduce these rejected encounters.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2024
Please provide details of MCPA agrees to use available MCO data to ensure duplicate payments
corrective action or are not made for services that are carved out from the MCO contracts.
explain disagreement. Specifically, MDH will work with the State University to develop a
reconciliation that reviews behavioral health ASO claims and MCO
encounters to detect duplicate payments for carved-out behavioral health
diagnoses. From there, the data will be evaluated to determine whether
the MCO or the BHASO will retract payment. Additionally, MDH will
ensure MCOs receive timely notification of additions to the carved-out
diagnoses list in order to update their claims payment logic.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/ 31/2023
Please provide details of MCPA will ensure claims paid for incarcerated individuals are excluded
corrective action or from the expenditure data used in the capitation rate calculation.
explain disagreement. Standard operating procedures will be developed to ensure compliance.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MCPA has taken corrective action to address carved out service claims
corrective action or that were improperly paid, including the claims mentioned above.
explain disagreement.
During the audit, MDH provided a spreadsheet identifying the
appropriate payor for each of the claims/encounters in the OLA sample
and instructed the payor who was not responsible to recoup funds from
the provider due to duplication. All claims were successfully recouped.
Future claims subject to the audit described in Recommendation 2b will
follow the same process.
For the 309 incarcerated recipients OLA stated that claims were paid for
in error, MCPA will disenroll the consumer at the end of the month and
verify the individual is an inmate once the review of the list has been
completed. MDH will ensure this process continues to be followed to
avoid erroneous capitated payments.
Improper Medicaid Payments
Finding 3
MCPA did not have an effective process to identify capitation payments to MCOs for
incarcerated individuals, resulting in approximately $14 million in improper payments
during fiscal years 2019 to 2022.
We recommend that MCPA
a. work with DPSCS to obtain complete and accurate incarceration data for its match
(repeat) and engage the assistance of the Department of Budget and Management Audit
Compliance Unit as necessary to resolve the matter,
b. ensure incarcerated individuals are timely disenrolled from MCOs to prevent improper
capitation payments (repeat), and
c. investigate the potential improper payments we identified and take corrective action
(such as recovery of improper payments) (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2024
Please provide details of MCPA will continue to partner with DPSCS to obtain complete and
corrective action or accurate incarceration data for its match process and will work to
explain disagreement. identify other sources of accurate data to enhance the identification of
incarcerated individuals.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of MCPA will ensure incarcerated individuals are timely disenrolled from
corrective action or MCOs to prevent improper capitation payments. When MCPA is
explain disagreement. notified through an automated process or manually validates an
individual’s incarceration status, the necessary steps to ensure
individuals are disenrolled timely are taken.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/23
Please provide details of MCPA continues to investigate approximately $14 million of potential
corrective action or improper claims payments representing 3,539 individuals. It is
explain disagreement. anticipated the review will be completed by the end of 2023. Once the
review is complete, corrective action will be taken to include the
recovery of improper payments, if appropriate.
MCO Supplemental Payments
Finding 4
MCPA did not investigate and recover potentially improper supplemental payments to
MCOs for newborn deliveries totaling $10.4 million.
We recommend that MCPA
a. investigate the propriety of all potentially improper newborn delivery supplemental
claims; and
b. recover any amounts paid for improper claims, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2024
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MCPA agrees to investigate the propriety of all potentially improper
corrective action or newborn delivery supplemental claims. MDH has established a
explain disagreement. methodology to determine whether a delivery has taken place using
encounter data and newborn enrollment files. MDH is also pursuing a
data sharing agreement with the Vital Statistics Administration to
validate birth events. If the payment cannot be corroborated by any of
these sources, MDH will require the MCOs to submit the demographic
information and delivery note, or proof of newborn enrollment, to
validate the delivery event took place. If the MCO cannot furnish any
information to support the payment within 45 days of the request, MDH
will retract the supplemental payment from the MCO.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MCPA has recovered all amounts paid for improper claims noted during
corrective action or the OLA audit. After determining that 10 of the 20 claims chosen as a
explain disagreement. sample for the audit were improper, MDH retracted the supplemental
payments to those MCOs on December 16, 2022. After the recovery, one
MCO challenged the retraction and successfully furnished evidence that
the delivery event that took place for the claim was a home birth. We
permitted the MCO to resubmit the claim for the supplemental payment,
resulting in 9 retractions from the audit sample.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 30 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditor