Title: Cecil County Public Schools
Date: 01/08/2024
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=659f0499d26f90d5bbc1d10f
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:11:10.560667
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Cecil County Public Schools
January 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shetty L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 8, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Cecil County
Public Schools (CCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether CCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that CCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive and were not always consistently used when obtaining goods and
services under intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements. In
addition, CCPS did not always prepare written justifications for sole source
procurements of education service contracts or obtain the approval of the Board of
Education as required by its policies. Furthermore, CCPS awarded a sole source
contract for a school bus camera system instead of conducting a competitive
procurement. CCPS allowed the vendor to draft both the camera system contract
and a related memorandum of understanding between CCPS and the Cecil County
Sheriff’s Office without them being reviewed for legal sufficiency.
Our audit also disclosed that CCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability for health care services. Specifically, CCPS did not audit or
adequately monitor the performance of its third-party administrators that provide
health care claims processing services.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed certain risks in CCPS’ information systems.
However, in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted these findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact

--- Page 4 ---
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to CCPS as well as those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 12 of the 14
findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings we determined that CCPS satisfactorily addressed 4 of those 5
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
CCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations and while there are other aspects of the response which will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Additionally, in
accordance with our policy, we have edited CCPS’ response to remove vendor
names or products. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of
CCPS’ response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
CCPS. We also wish to acknowledge CCPS’ willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 6
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Revenue and Billing Cycle 10
Federal Funds 11
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 13
practices were not incorporated into Cecil County Public Schools
(CCPS) policies and/or were not consistently used when
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements.
Finding 2 – CCPS did not always prepare written justifications for sole 16
source procurements of education service contracts or obtain the
approval of the Board of Education as required.
Human Resources and Payroll 16
Equipment Control and Accountability 17
Information Technology
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 17
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
3

--- Page 6 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 18
Transportation Services
 Finding 8 – CCPS did not obtain and use actual cost information when 21
negotiating bus contracts to assess the reasonableness of proposed
payment elements. Further, certain elements of bus contractor
payments did not reflect market conditions, could not be supported,
or did not consider available fuel credits.
Finding 9 – CCPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus 23
safety camera system instead of conducting a competitive procurement.
Additionally, CCPS allowed the vendor to draft both the contract and
memorandum of understanding between CCPS and the Cecil County
Sheriff’s Office without being reviewed for legal sufficiency.
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 25
Food Services 25
School Board Oversight 26
Management of Other Risks
Finding 11 – CCPS did not audit or adequately monitor the performance 28
of its third-party administrators that provide health care claims
processing services.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 30
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Cecil County Public Schools (CCPS) ranks
14th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2022 full-time student enrollment was 14,780 students. CCPS had 30
schools, consisting of 17 elementary, 6 middle schools, 5 high schools, 1
vocational school, and 1 alternative school.
Funding
CCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State, Cecil County,
and the federal government. According to the CCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $264.5 million in
fiscal year 2022; including approximately $128 million from the State. See
Figure 1 below for CCPS’ revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year
2022 according to its audited financial statements.
Figure 1
CCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2022
Miscellaneous
$163
Federal
1%
$2,805
16%
State
$8,658
Local
48%
$6,270
35%
Source: CCPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
5

--- Page 8 ---
Expenditures
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2022 expenditures
were approximately $260 million. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 81 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2022. According to MSDE records, during
the 2021-2022 school year, CCPS had 2,125 full-time equivalent positions, which
consisted of 1,526 instructional and 599 non-instructional positions. Instruction
accounted for 60 percent of CCPS’ expenditures on a categorical basis (see Figure
2).
Figure 2
CCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2022
(amounts in millions)
$155
Instruction
60%
$32
Special Education
12%
Enrollment
$28
Administration & Support 14,780
11%
$23
Facilities & Capital Projects Employees
9%
2,125
$13
Transportation
5%
Cost Per Pupil
$9
Food Service $17,596
3%
Source: CCPS' Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of CCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with CCPS to comply with
the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Cecil County government
6

--- Page 9 ---
exercises authority over CCPS primarily through the review and approval of
CCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
External Audits
CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its annual
financial statements. The firm performs procedures to verify the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements. The firm also evaluates the
appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of CCPS as of June 30, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, and
2022, and the changes in its financial position and its cash flows for the years then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
CCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of CCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, and other
matters. This report is an integral part of the annual independent audited financial
statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of CCPS’ federal
grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance to the federal
government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the entity is generally
in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2017 through 2022 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2021 audits, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork.
Certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm, which we
determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a
result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the following areas:
 State and local government revenues received via wire transfer
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
7

--- Page 10 ---
The independent accounting firm did not disclose any material deficiencies in
these areas.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 12 of the 14
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated July 26, 2017. As
disclosed in Figure 3, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined
that CCPS satisfactorily addressed 4 of these 5 findings. The remaining non-
cybersecurity-related finding is repeated in this report.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
There was no independent verification that all recorded collections Not repeated
Finding 1
were subsequently deposited (Not followed up on)
CCPS had not established adequate internal controls over its
Finding 2 Status Redacted1
automated accounts payable functions.
CCPS did not use the methodology described in the request for
Finding 3 Not repeated
proposal when evaluating the bids for certain professional services.
CCPS did not assess the benefits of using intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA) as required by State law,
Finding 4 Not repeated
nor in most cases did it establish that the ICPA’s were awarded
through a competitive procurement process.
Human resources and payroll system user capabilities were not
Finding 5 adequately monitored and restricted. In addition, independent reviews Status Redacted1
of personnel and payroll transactions were not performed.
CCPS had not established adequate controls over its automated
Not repeated
Finding 6 equipment inventory records as system entries were not independently
(Not followed up on)
verified and access to the records was not adequately restricted.
Database and server controls were not sufficient, as security activity
Finding 7 Status Redacted1
was not logged.
CCPS did not have a Disaster Recovery Plan for recovering computer
Finding 8 Status Redacted1
operations.
1 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The CCPS computer network was not adequately secured, as the
internal network could be exposed to attack from external sources and
Finding 9 Status Redacted2
reports of attacks from the CCPS intrusion detection prevention
system were either not generated or when generated not reviewed.
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
Finding 10 Status Redacted2
malware.
CCPS executed three 20-year power-purchasing agreements with a
solar provider without a competitive process or a formal financial Not repeated
Finding 11
analysis, and without evidence it had fully resolved the risk concerns
of its legal counsel.
CCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing procedures and did
not periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and Not repeated
Finding 12
related bus capacities to maximize the efficiency of its bus routes and
address bus routes operating below ridership capacity goals.
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did
not reflect market conditions, use actual costs, or consider available Repeated
Finding 13
fuel credits, resulting in higher payments than necessary for student (Current Finding 8)
transportation services.
There was no documented independent review and approval of the
monthly payments for contractor bus operating costs, and user access
Finding 14 Status Redacted2
to the automated system used to calculate bus payments was not
adequately restricted.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Cecil County Public Schools (CCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds received
from the State, Cecil County, and the federal government. According to CCPS’
audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately
$264.5 million in fiscal year 2022; including approximately $128 million from the
State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited CCPS’ financial statements and the objectives of our
audit for certain revenue activities. We relied on this work to provide audit
coverage for State and local government revenues received via wire transfer and
accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural review and testing
disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2022, school
activity collections totaled $1.4 million and the June 30, 2022 fund balance was
$1.7 million.
CCPS’ Board of Education has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that school
activity funds were used only for intended purposes. The independent certified
public accounting (CPA) firm contracted by CCPS to perform the annual financial
audit also conducts limited reviews of the school activity funds. These reviews
consist primarily of school activity fund bank reconciliations and confirmations.
The CPA’s review did not disclose any issues.
In addition, it is the policy of CCPS’ Business Services Office to conduct annual
reviews of the school activity funds at each of its schools.3 The reviews consist of
evaluating and testing compliance with CCPS' policies, regulations, and
procedures. The results of the reviews are provided to the respective school’s
principal and CCPS management to be addressed. Our review of these reviews
3 Due to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, CCPS’ Business Services Office did not conduct
reviews of school activity funds from March 2020 to June 2021.
10

--- Page 13 ---
during fiscal years 2018, 2019, and 2020 generally found the management of
these funds to be adequate, control weaknesses identified were not prevalent, and
the reports reviewed did not identify any improprieties regarding the misuse of
funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA and CCPS Business Services Office
to provide audit coverage in this area, including procedures and controls related to
the accounting for and safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and
billing.
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to CCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2022 (latest available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled $39.9
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid
reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $14.8 million in fiscal year 2019 to $39.9 million in
fiscal year 2022 (170 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
Specifically, according to CCPS’ records, as of June 30, 2022, CCPS was
awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $60.5 million to be
distributed over federal fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security Act, Coronavirus Response and Relief
Supplemental Appropriations Act, and American Recovery Plan Act.4
As of June 30, 2022, CCPS expenditures related to these COVID-19 grants
programs totaled $25.4 million, from March 2020 to June 2022, and were
primarily comprised of staffing, laptops, instructional software and materials,
personal protection equipment, and sanitary supplies. CCPS has policies and
procedures to ensure grant funds are properly monitored and accounted for, and
4 In addition to the federal grants, CCPS was also awarded five State and local COVID-19 grants
totaling $1.2 million, of which $778,000 had been spent as of June 30, 2022. Specifically, CCPS
received County COVID-19 relief and assistance awards of $805,000 and State Broadband
enhancement awards of $348,000. State and local grants are subject to review and testing during
our audit.
11

--- Page 14 ---
used to the fullest extent possible. In addition, reports of grant fund activity are
presented periodically to the Board. CCPS initially funded the expenditures with
State and local funds and intends to obtain reimbursement from the
aforementioned programs to the extent allowed.
Single Audit Reports Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audit of CCPS’ federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on CCPS
compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered
the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the
required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed
and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2017 through 2022.
The related reports stated that CCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
CCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to CCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in December 2021 of the results of its review of 75 student
case files for 72 criteria (including the correct billing of Medicaid for eligible
services). The report found that CCPS was generally compliant with most
criteria. For example, CCPS was 100 percent compliant with 61 criteria and
between 94 and 99 percent compliant with 8 criteria. According to CCPS records,
fiscal year 2022 state and federal reimbursements for Medicaid-subsidized
services totaled approximately $1.6 million which was 60 percent higher than the
,
previous year, due to increases in the provision of services provided and the
processing of related billings.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
We relied on the work of the independent certified public accounting firm that
12

--- Page 15 ---
conducted the Single Audits for all other work in this area, including policies,
procedures, and controls with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and CCPS records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $50 million during fiscal year 2022. CCPS uses an
automated system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are created in
the system by departments and are subject to on-line departmental and purchasing
department approvals. Purchase orders are prepared in the system by the
purchasing department based on approved requisitions. The purchasing
department also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts.
Hardcopy invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable
department for entry into the financial management system. The system matches
invoices to appropriate purchasing documents and the verification of receipt
entered by the receiving school or department. Payments are processed by
Business Services through the automated system, which either prints vendor
checks or transfers the funds electronically, and then posts the payment to the
financial records.
CCPS’ written procurement policies require that procurements exceeding $50,000
be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. Contracts and agreements exceeding $50,000
that CCPS procures are to be approved by the Board.
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into CCPS policies and/or were not consistently used when
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements
(ICPAs).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into CCPS policies and/or were not consistently used by CCPS when
participating in an ICPA. State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General
Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of
ICPAs only after the using entity has determined (or assessed) in writing that the
use of such arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote administrative
13

--- Page 16 ---
efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental cooperation.5 According to CCPS
records, CCPS used ICPAs for 58 procurements with awards totaling $14.9
million during fiscal years 2020 through 2022.
Our review of CCPS procurement policies disclosed that the following statutory
requirement and critical best practices were not included.
 Prepare a written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA as required
by State law
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs
 Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications, and price meet our needs
 Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions
In addition, we tested CCPS’ participation in seven ICPAs (selected based on
significance) during fiscal years 2018 through 2022, with contract awards totaling
approximately $3.3 million. Our review disclosed that although CCPS had
completed a checklist to document its written assessment of the benefits of using
six of the seven ICPAs tested, CCPS did not adhere to three best practices for all
seven ICPAs tested that were not included in CCPS policy (analyzing the costs of
conducting competitive solicitations, researching, comparing, and evaluating
other available ICPAs, and executing an addendum of participation with the lead
agency). One other best practice that was included in CCPS policy (obtain a copy
of ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification) was not complied with for
five of the seven ICPAs tested.
We did find that other best practices were performed despite not being included in
CCPS’ policies. For example, CCPS verified the ICPA had a clause allowing
utilization by other parties and verified the terms, scope of services, specifications
and overall price met their needs for six of the seven ICPAs we tested.
5 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5- 112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Incorporating ICPA best practices into CCPS procurement policies could help
ensure they are consistently used.
CCPS also did not ensure the amounts invoiced by the ICPA vendors agreed with
the original contract pricing. Specifically, our test of eight payments totaling $2
million related to the seven aforementioned ICPAs disclosed that CCPS had not
obtained the price information to verify it was receiving the discounts or pricing
as stated in the governing ICPA for five payments totaling $1.5 million. CCPS
relied on informal cost proposals received from the vendors, instead of the actual
contract terms and conditions from the ICPAs, to verify invoice pricing. Using
available price lists or internet searches we noted that vendor pricing was similar
to market prices for comparable items for vendor payments totaling $928,000, but
we could not readily perform such a review of pricing for the remaining payments
totaling $536,000.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, ICPA users should ensure that the contract was awarded through a
competitive procurement process, and require that addendums be executed
documenting their participation and incorporating local required terms and
conditions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS
a. incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirement and other
identified and acknowledged best practices into its procurement policies,
and ensure that the performance of the requirement and best practices
are documented when evaluating and participating in ICPAs; and
b. ensure that amounts invoiced by ICPA vendors agreed with the related
contract pricing.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 2
CCPS did not always prepare written justifications for sole source
procurements of education service contracts or obtain the approval of the
Board of Education as required.
Analysis
CCPS did not always prepare written justifications for sole source procurements
of education service contracts or obtain the approval of the Board of Education as
required. Our test of eight sole source procurements awarded in fiscal years 2020
and 2022 totaling $2.8 million disclosed that written justifications were not
prepared as required for five procurements totaling $1.9 million. In addition,
these five sole source contract awards for education services were not submitted
to the Board of Education for approval as required.
According to CCPS records, CCPS used the sole source procurement method for
20 procurements with awards totaling $3.3 million in fiscal years 2020 to 2022.
State law and CCPS policy require that competitive procurement practices be
used to the extent possible for purchases exceeding $50,000. In addition, a
written justification must be prepared when there is only one source available, and
these procurements must be approved by the Board of Education.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that written justifications are prepared for sole source
procurements as required, and
b. ensure that sole source procurements are approved by the Board of
Education as required.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS budget.
According to CCPS’ records, fiscal year 2022 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $210 million, representing 81 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2021-2022 school year CCPS had 2,125 full-time positions, which
consisted of 1,526 instructional and 599 non-instructional positions.
CCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
16

--- Page 19 ---
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of CCPS’ internal control over the human resources and payroll areas of
operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory was $29.3 million as of June 30, 2022. CCPS
maintains centralized automated records for all equipment including assets with a
cost of $5,000 or more (including assets capitalized for financial statement
purposes). Control and recordkeeping of laptop computers assigned to schools,
students, and employees was maintained in a database maintained by the Office of
Technology Services. CCPS has established comprehensive written equipment
policies and performs inventories at each school at least every two years.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 3
through 7 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available report in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with CCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS employs a staff of 172 employees to maintain its 30 schools (including a
vocational and an alternative school) and a number of other facilities (such as
administrative and support offices). According to its fiscal year 2022 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to CCPS’ facilities over the next five years are estimated to cost
$107.7 million.
CCPS Capital Projects Were Competitively Solicited and Approved by the
Board and Related Expenditures Were Properly Supported
Our review of two high dollar construction-related procurements awarded during
fiscal years 2017 to 2020 totaling $22 million, disclosed that the contracts were
competitively procured and approved by the Board. In addition, our test of six
invoices totaling $6.8 million for these contracts disclosed that they were properly
supported and in accordance with contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
CCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and
minimize energy costs. For example, CCPS provides preventive maintenance of
its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing emergency repairs. In
addition, CCPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore area entities
18

--- Page 21 ---
to purchase energy at the best possible terms for members of the consortium.
CCPS also uses a vendor energy management program to monitor and control
heating and air conditioning usage and a utility bill management program to
monitor related costs. CCPS has written best practices that encourage both
students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use and conducts
internal on-site reviews of building energy efficiency. Further, CCPS makes
limited use of solar and geothermal alternative energy sources.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of CCPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, renovation, and
maintenance financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit also did
not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), CCPS has approximately 14,300 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported using 132 contractor-
owned buses and 9 system-owned buses. CCPS reported that 2.6 million route
miles were traveled to transport students for the 2021-2022 school year.
CCPS bus contracts are for one-year terms and continue annually throughout the
service life of the contractor’s buses, subject to the Board’s right to terminate the
contract for various reasons (such as available funding, cause, contractor
insolvency, termination of routes to reduce or consolidate routes). During school
year 2021-2022, CCPS had contracts with 13 bus contractors for student
transportation. According to CCPS’ financial records, fiscal year 2022
transportation costs totaled $12.5 million, including $9.1 million (73 percent) paid
to 13 bus contractors. When schools were closed, between March 17, 2020 to
September 1, 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, CCPS continued to pay the
bus contractors at its agreed-upon rates (except for fuel). The cost components
for contractor bus payments for fiscal year 2022 are summarized in Figure 4.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 4
Cost Components for Bus Contractor Payments
Fiscal Year 2022
(dollar amounts in millions)
Cost Component Amount
Maintenance Fee and Fuel Costs $3.3 36%
Reimbursements for Drivers Hourly Rates 3.1 35%
Per-vehicle Allotment (PVA) – reimbursement for the cost of
2.3 25%
purchasing a bus
Other Costs – (such as administrative fee and spare buses) 0.4 4%
Total $9.1 100%
Source: CCPS Records
School Bus Safety Camera Program
As allowed by State and County law, CCPS contracted for the use of school bus
safety cameras to monitor drivers who illegally pass a stopped school bus and
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Cecil County
Sheriff’s Office to process citations and receive CCPS’s share of program
revenue. In May 2021, CCPS’ School Board approved a five-year sole-source
contract (with a five-year renewal option) to a vendor to install and operate bus
safety cameras that would be owned and maintained by the vendor on CCPS
owned and contracted-for school buses. The contract also provided for internal
cameras to monitor the conduct of drivers and students inside the bus.
While the vendor installed the cameras on CCPS buses in June 2021, the program
did not begin until January 2022, when Cecil County legislation passed in
November 2021, that allowed the use of a bus camera safety monitoring and
enforcement system, became effective. Vehicles that are caught on camera
illegally passing a bus are assessed a $250 violation. The cameras take videos
and still images of vehicles (and license plate) passing a bus that is operating its
alternating flashing red lights. The registered owner(s) of the vehicles are
identified by vendor employees using access provided by County law
enforcement to Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) and the National
Law Enforcement Telecommunications System (NLETS) databases. Upon
notification from the vendor, the Cecil County Sheriff’s Office verifies the image
of the event constitutes a violation and the vendor prints and mails the citation to
the registered owner. Citations can be paid to the vendor by credit card,
electronically through the internet, or by mailing a check. The vendor is required
to develop automated processes to retrieve and post all daily payment data.
20

--- Page 23 ---
The contract provides that the monthly citation revenue would be disbursed 60
percent to the vendor and 40 percent to CCPS.6 In addition, CCPS would pay a
monthly technology fee of $115 per bus to the vendor that would be deducted
from CCPS’ 40 percent share of the citation revenue prior to distribution.
Finding 8
CCPS did not obtain and use actual cost information when negotiating bus
contracts to assess the reasonableness of proposed payment elements.
Further, certain elements of bus contractor payments did not reflect market
conditions, could not be supported, or did not consider available fuel credits.
Analysis
CCPS did not obtain and use actual cost information when negotiating bus
contracts to assess reasonableness of proposed payment elements. Further, certain
elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did not reflect
market conditions, could not be supported, or did not consider available fuel
credits. Although for fiscal year 2021, CCPS has the 10th lowest cost per rider,
10th lowest cost per bus, and 2nd lowest cost per mile among the 24 local school
systems, the basis for these cost elements should be adequately documented and
justified to provide assurance that the cost structure is appropriate (and costs are
reasonable). Our review of the contract payments disclosed the following
conditions:
 The standard contract language used by CCPS for its bus contracts did not
include a right to audit provision. Such a provision would allow CCPS to
verify the contractors’ actual costs of purchasing and maintaining the buses
when negotiating the per-vehicle allotment (PVA), plus hourly
reimbursements for drivers, the per-mile maintenance fee, fuel costs, and the
annual administrative fees. The State of Maryland has established a
preference in regulation that all contracts require contractors to make their
records available for audit by authorized representatives of the State at all
reasonable times. Further, the use of audited cost data in negotiations is a best
practice for federal contracts and is recommended by certain consulting firms.
 The negotiated methodology used to calculate the PVA paid to the 13 bus
contractors could not be supported and consequently may not have been in the
best interest of CCPS. A primary component of the PVA payment is the
allowable return on investment (ROI). There is no generally agreed upon
formula or method for determining ROI; however, a consultant hired by
6 According to the MOU, CCPS designated the County Sheriff’s Office the recipient of these
funds to reimburse it for associated costs for participating in this Program.
21

--- Page 24 ---
another school system in 2012 recommended the prime rate plus two percent
as a reasonable ROI. CCPS used an ROI rate of 9.5 percent in its payment
formula for the 72 buses placed into service by contractors from fiscal year
2016 through 2022. CCPS could not document the basis for the ROI used to
enable an assessment of whether the rate was in the best interest of CCPS. In
this regard, if CCPS would have used the prime rate plus two percent for the
ROI calculation (which ranged from 5.25 to 6.75 percent during fiscal years
2016 to 2022 at the time the buses were initially placed into service), we
estimate that CCPS could have saved approximately $2.9 million over the 15-
year life of those buses.
 CCPS could not support the appropriateness of the estimated $2 million it paid
to bus contractors for per-mile bus maintenance costs ($0.8609 per mile)
during fiscal year 2022. The per-mile bus maintenance cost is intended to
fund the expenses incurred by the bus contractors for maintaining the bus, but
no cost data was compiled and analyzed to determine what should be
reimbursed.
 CCPS did not exclude federal excise and State fuel taxes from payments to
bus contractors. CCPS pays contractors for fuel usage using a monthly
average of diesel fuel prices, including taxes, and dividing by a miles per
gallon rate established by CCPS. However, according to federal and State
law, CCPS contractors are exempt from the per gallon federal excise tax and
per gallon State fuel tax on diesel fuel7 and are able to receive a credit for fuel
taxes paid when they file their income tax returns. If CCPS had considered
the exemption amount in its calculation, payments to the contractors would
have been lower in total by $1.1 million for fiscal years 2017 through 2022.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. CCPS’
response to our preceding report indicated that corrective actions would be
implemented to address our recommendations; however, CCPS did not take the
corrective actions as indicated.
7 The per gallon federal excise tax was $0.243 from fiscal year 2017 to fiscal year 2022 while the
per gallon State fuel tax ranged from $0.3425 in fiscal year 2017 to $0.3685 in fiscal year 2022.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS
a. include a provision to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and
use it to determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses for
consideration during contract price negotiations,
b. consider using an ROI to calculate the PVA payments to bus contractors
that provides a reasonable rate of return consistent with the study from
2012 (repeat),
c. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs or otherwise develop supportable cost
estimates as the basis for per mile maintenance costs (repeat),
d. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments (repeat).
Finding 9
CCPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus safety camera system
instead of conducting a competitive procurement. Additionally, CCPS
allowed the vendor to draft both the contract and the memorandum of
understanding (MOU) between CCPS and the Cecil County Sheriff’s Office
without being reviewed for legal sufficiency.
Analysis
CCPS awarded a sole source contract with a vendor for a school bus camera
system instead of conducting a competitive procurement. Additionally, CCPS
allowed the vendor to draft the contract between the vendor and CCPS and the
MOU between CCPS and the Cecil County Sheriff’s Office without being
reviewed for legal sufficiency by CCPS to ensure that government interests were
appropriately addressed.
Lack of a Competitive Procurement
CCPS did not solicit other bids for the school bus safety camera system contract
or formally consider utilizing an ICPA to determine whether another vendor could
implement the program. Also, CCPS’ written justification for the sole source
procurement incorrectly indicated there was only one source for these services.
Our audits of other Maryland local education agencies (LEAs) have disclosed that
other vendors exist and at least one LEA has awarded a similar contract using a
competitive bidding process. In addition, other LEAs have conducted
procurements that have included negotiations of the financial terms (such as
revenue sharing and other fees), which in the case of CCPS, without
documentation to the contrary, appear to have been unilaterally imposed by the
vendor.
23

--- Page 26 ---
CCPS management advised us that it learned about the benefits of a particular
vendor’s school bus safety camera program that was implemented in other school
systems and CCPS approached this vendor to implement a similar program.
CCPS management also advised us that it had conversations with other LEAs in
Maryland which had contracts with the vendor but did not perform a documented
comparison of key financial terms. CCPS agreed that the monthly citation
revenue would be disbursed 60 percent to the vendor and 40 percent to the
County. In addition, CCPS agreed to a monthly $115 technology fee per bus that
is paid out of the County’s 40 percent share of the citation revenue. However,
CCPS did not have support for how the technology fee was determined by the
vendor or why it was necessary in addition to the revenue sharing. By CCPS
allowing the vendor to receive a 60 percent share of the citation revenue plus the
technology fee, the County (for the Sheriff’s Office) has not received any
program revenue as of March 31, 2023.
According to the vendor’s invoices, the citation revenue totaled $414,425 for the
first 15 months of the program’s operation from January 1, 2022 through March
31, 2023. Additionally, the amount owed to the vendor totaled $549,295, which
included the vendor’s 60 percent share of the citation revenue totaling $248,655
and the monthly technology fees totaling $300,640. Since the citation revenue
was not sufficient to cover the amount owed to the vendor, the outstanding
balance of the technology fees due from future revenues totaled $134,870 as of
March 31, 2023.8
Lack of Review for Legal Sufficiency
CCPS did not have evidence that the contract with the vendor or memorandum of
understanding (MOU) between CCPS and the Cecil County Sheriff’s Office was
reviewed for legal sufficiency by its legal counsel. Instead, CCPS allowed the
vendor to draft the related contract for the school bus safety camera services as
well as the financial terms related to the vendor’s fees and sharing of revenue and
CCPS, without the documented involvement of its legal counsel, made minimal
edits to the draft (edits consisted mostly of names and dates). In addition, the
MOU did not sufficiently define the responsibilities of the parties under the
MOU. For example, unlike the MOUs with other county school systems, there
were no details regarding how the billing and collection of citations was to be
performed, the need for criminal background checks on vendor employees
processing citations (this requirement to safeguard vehicle owners’ PII is also
8 The contract provides that, in the event CCPS’ gross revenue share is insufficient to cover the
technology fees owed for the month, the balance of unpaid technology fees are rolled over for
payment in the following month until all outstanding technology fees are paid. The contract
does stipulate that CCPS is not liable for any outstanding technology fees that exceed citation
revenue at the end of the agreement.
24

--- Page 27 ---
omitted from the contract between the vendor and CCPS), or the need to segregate
access to the interior and exterior system image and financial data files.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. adhere to statutory requirements for competitive bidding, where
appropriate;
b. ensure the basis and reasoning for revenue sharing and technology fees
are documented in future school bus safety camera contracts; and
c. seek retroactive review and approval from its legal counsel for the school
bus safety camera contract and MOU with the Cecil County Sheriff’s
Office.
We determined that Finding 10 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with CCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Food Services
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $8.7 million in fiscal year 2022 and were primarily funded
with federal funds totaling $11.9 million and food sales totaling $383,500.
According to MSDE records, in fiscal year 2022, CCPS had 99 food services
positions for its 30 schools, consisting of 93 cafeteria positions and 6
administrative positions.
Similar to other Maryland Local Education Agencies, CCPS continued to serve
meals from certain schools during the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis by
providing free meals for parents and students to pick up. The number of meals
increased by 13 percent from 2.7 million in fiscal year 2019 to 3.1 million in
fiscal year 2022. CCPS food service expenditures increased by 31 percent (food
25

--- Page 28 ---
costs and equipment) during the same period, from $6.6 million to $8.7 million.
CCPS indicated that no employees were laid off due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to the Food Services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Cecil County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five elected
members and one non-voting student representative. The Board contracted with a
certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits of the CCPS
financial statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight of various
areas of CCPS operation and governance, the Board established several
committees, such as a Citizen Advisory Committee and an Ethics Panel.
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both
Board members and CCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, appointed officials (such as the
Superintendent), and members of administrative/supervisory units (such as school
principals) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, CCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
three members appointed by the President of the Board to interpret ethics policies
and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules
on any reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for
Board members and CCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure
forms for calendar year 2021 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
CCPS is self-insured and contracts with five third-party administrator firms
(TPAs) for health care claims processing services9 for employee and retiree
medical, prescription, dental, and vision costs. CCPS also contracts with a
consultant to help manage the health plans. The consultant performs data analysis
of health services utilization and costs, provides recommendations on potential
rate changes, and evaluates the merits of health plan proposals. In addition, CCPS
contracts with an insurer for stop-loss insurance, which indemnifies CCPS against
health claim amounts that exceed $275,000 per participant per plan year.
The health benefit plans for CCPS employees and retirees are financed through
governmental funds, with a fiduciary fund (referred to as the Retiree Benefit Trust
Fund) established as an investment reserve for future retiree health benefit costs.10
The plans provide coverage under Figure 5
contracts with several insurance
CCPS 2022 Healthcare Financing
companies and a health
(dollar amounts in millions)
maintenance organization (HMO).
Revenues
According to CCPS records, the
Employer Contributions $24.6
healthcare revenues and
Employee/Retiree Contributions 9.9
expenditures for fiscal year 2022
Rebates 2.0
totaled $38.0 million and $31.6
Retiree Benefit Trust Fund 1.5
million respectively (see Figure 5).
Total Revenue $38.0
CCPS employs a verification
Expenditures
process in its enrollment
Claims Payments $26.7
procedures whereby employees
Administrative Fees 3.3
must submit documentation (such
Stop-loss Insurance Premiums 1.6
as birth certificates) for
Total Expenditures $31.6
dependents they want added to
Source: CCPS Records
their health plan. As of June 30,
2022, CCPS provided health insurance
benefits to approximately 4,400 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees.
9 There is a separate TPA for the claims for each of the preferred provider medical entities, health
maintenance organizations and the prescription, dental, and vision plans.
10 These funds are invested with the Maryland Association of Boards of Education, Other Post-
Employment Benefits Investment Trust and totaled $15 million as of June 30, 2022.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Finding 11
CCPS did not audit or adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrators that provide health care claims processing services.
Analysis
CCPS did not audit or adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrators (TPAs) that provide health care claims processing services.
Specifically, although CCPS verified the propriety of administrative fees, it did
not verify the propriety of TPA billings for employee and retiree health care
claims (including HMO costs), and the receipt of prescription drug rebates.
Additionally, CCPS did not perform audits of TPA performance measures.
 CCPS did not obtain and review claim data to support the amounts billed by
the five TPAs for healthcare claims (including HMO costs). Rather, CCPS
was provided with a schedule of the total claims paid for each health plan.
CCPS approved the claim payments based on a review of the summary data
with no review of supporting documentation.
 Although we were advised CCPS tracked the receipt of prescription drug
rebates and compared it to prior year amounts, this process was not
documented. Additionally, CCPS did not audit the pharmacy TPA to ensure
that it received all the prescription drug rebates the TPA received from drug
manufacturers. Drug rebates are determined based on volume and type of
drug dispensed per agreements with drug manufacturers.
 CCPS did not routinely audit healthcare claims (including HMO costs) paid
by the TPAs to ensure that the billed services were provided to participants,
were covered by the health plans, and that amounts paid were proper. The last
claims audit performed by CCPS was for claims paid during fiscal years 2014
and 2015. CCPS’ TPA contracts allowed for periodic independent third-party
audits of the accuracy and validity of claim reimbursements paid by CCPS.
 CCPS did not audit, or otherwise verify, the accuracy of TPA self-reported
compliance with performance measures. For example, one medical insurance
TPA contract included 10 performance measures relating to account
management, claim administration, plan sponsor services, and member
services. Additionally, the contract allowed for the assessment of penalties up
to $98,000 annually, if the TPA did not meet the performance measures.
However, CCPS had not determined whether any penalties were self-assessed
by this medical TPA. In addition, the other medical TPA reported self-
assessed penalties of $15,220 in calendar year 2022 based on its reported
compliance, but CCPS did not have a process in place to verify the TPA’s
28

--- Page 31 ---
reported compliance. Finally, the remaining three TPA contracts included
performance measures that allowed for the assessment of penalties, but none
were reported.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish procedures to independently verify the propriety of TPA
billings;
b. conduct pharmacy TPA audits to assess that all drug rebates due were
received;
c. conduct claims audits to assess the accuracy and validity of claim
reimbursements made by the TPAs; and
d. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPAs’
compliance with reported performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Cecil County Public Schools
(CCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which generally
requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school systems to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management practices. This
performance audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of these areas
was based on our assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up
on the status of findings included in our preceding audit report on CCPS dated
July 26, 2017, was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current
audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
CCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
30

--- Page 33 ---
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2022.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
CCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit, as well as the
reviews of student activity funds performed by CCPS’ Business Services
Department.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the CCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to CCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
CCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to CCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our audit fieldwork from April 2022 to December 2022. CCPS’
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS regarding the results of our review of its
response.
32

--- Page 35 ---
APPENDIX
CECIL COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOLS
OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT
GEORGE WASHINGTON CARVER EDUCATION LEADERSHIP CENTER
201 BOOTII STREET • ELKTO'.'I, MD 21921
Serving £earners, q'amifeis, amf tfte Co1111111111ity phone: 410.996.5499 • fax: 410.996.5471 • www.ccps.org
Jeffrey A. Lawson, Ed.D. Diana B. Hawley
Superintendent of Schools President, Board of Education
December 13, 2023
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Maryland General Assembly
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed please find Cecil County Public Schools' responses to the draft audit report
recommendations.
I would like to thank you and your staff for assisting us to identify areas in which we can
improve the performance and efficiency of our school system. Please do not hesitate to contact
me if you have any questions or require any additional information.
Cc: Ms. Diana B. Hawley, Board of Education President
Ms. Denise M. Sopa, Chief Financial Officer
Our Mission: CCPS serves equitably through positive relationships as a safe, coffaborative co11111111nity. /Ve wiff ens11re aff learners
acq11ire the kno1Vledge, skiffs, and q11alities lo be responsible, caring, and ethical citizens.

--- Page 36 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not incorporated into
CCPS policies and/or were not consistently used when participating in intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA).
We recommend that CCPS
a. incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirement and other identified and
acknowledged best practices into its procurement policies, and ensure that the
performance of the requirement and best practices are documented when evaluating
and participating in ICPAs; and
b. ensure that amounts invoiced by ICPA vendors agreed with the related contract
pricing.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/7/2024
Please provide details of CCPS is in the process of revising our procurement policy and
corrective action or regulation. We will include the aforementioned statutory requirement
explain disagreement. and other identified best practices. We have also already updated our
internal worksheet to reflect these requirements and best practices to
ensure we are following them with each ICPA.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2023
Please provide details of When we solicit quotes from vendors, we will require the vendor to
corrective action or include the list price and the discounted contract price. We will ensure
explain disagreement. that the appropriate discount is being included in our price. This
information will be attached to the requisition for the purchase order.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 37 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
CCPS did not always prepare written justifications for sole source procurements of
education service contracts or obtain the approval of the Board of Education as required.
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that written justifications are prepared for sole source procurements as
required, and
b. ensure that sole source procurements are approved by the Board of Education as
required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Originally, we worked with a specific non-public program when a
additional comments as student was identified by an IEP team as needing this type of specialized
deemed necessary. educational placement. With this being the closest non-public,
appropriate placement for a student, it did not require us to follow
procurement procedures. Starting in 2020, CCPS began utilizing this
vendor to create specialized classrooms within the school system. There
was some confusion distinguishing between the uses of the vendor and
what required Board of Education approval and what did not.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2023
Please provide details of Written justification will be provided for each sole source procurement.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2023
Please provide details of All sole source procurements will be approved by the Board of
corrective action or Education before contracts are signed and awarded.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 38 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Technology
section, including Findings 3 through 7 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the
State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including
the analysis, related recommendations, along with CCPS’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, CCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and related
recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 39 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 8
CCPS did not obtain and use actual cost information when negotiating bus contracts to
assess the reasonableness of proposed payment elements. Further, certain elements of bus
contractor payments did not reflect market conditions, could not be supported, or did not
consider available fuel credits.
We recommend that CCPS
a. include a provision to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use it to
determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses for consideration during
contract price negotiations,
b. consider using an ROI to calculate the PVA payments to bus contractors that provides
a reasonable rate of return consistent with the study from 2012 (repeat),
c. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates for per mile
maintenance costs or otherwise develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for per
mile maintenance costs (repeat),
d. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/01/2024
Please provide details of CCPS will require all bus contractors to provide a pay scale for bus
corrective action or drivers and bus assistants on an annual basis. The scale must be specific
explain disagreement. and identify the number of drivers and assistants at each pay scale. If
contractors fail to provide this information, CCPS will reserve the right
to audit the contractor.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Process
Please provide details of CCPS believes that the rate of return is reasonable per the CCPS Table
corrective action or of Rates. With that being said, CCPS will work to minimize increases in
explain disagreement. PVA in the next Table of Rates negotiation.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 40 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2024
Please provide details of CCPS will require all bus contractors to provide general bus
corrective action or maintenance costs at the end of each fiscal year. We will use this data
explain disagreement. going forward in negotiations with our bus contractors to determine
reasonable contractor maintenance rates per mile.
Recommendation 8d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2023
Please provide details of CCPS will exclude the state fuel excise tax from contractor pay.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 41 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
CCPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus safety camera system instead of
conducting a competitive procurement. Additionally, CCPS allowed the vendor to draft
both the contract and the memorandum of understanding (MOU) between CCPS and the
Cecil County Sheriff’s Office without being reviewed for legal sufficiency.
We recommend that CCPS
a. adhere to statutory requirements for competitive bidding, where appropriate;
b. ensure the basis and reasoning for revenue sharing and technology fees are documented
in future school bus safety camera contracts; and
c. seek retroactive review and approval from its legal counsel for the school bus safety
camera contract and MOU with the Cecil County Sheriff’s Office.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The aforementioned contract was reviewed by Cecil County
additional comments as Government’s legal counsel prior to entering into the contract.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Current
Process
Please provide details of At the time, CCPS believed we were adhering to statutory requirements
corrective action or for competitive bidding because we were not aware of another vendor
explain disagreement. offering this specific type of safety camera system. We will adhere to
statutory requirements for competitive bidding when this contract is up
for renewal.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Winter 2024
Please provide details of CCPS is currently in the process of renegotiating the contract with the
corrective action or current vendor, focusing on the revenue sharing plan and the technology
explain disagreement. fees.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Winter 2024
Please provide details of CCPS is currently in the process of renegotiating the contract with the
corrective action or current vendor, and we will share this contract with legal counsel before
explain disagreement. contract implementation.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 42 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
OLA has determined that Finding 10 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance
and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore
is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including the analysis,
related recommendation(s), along with CCPS’ response, have been redacted from this report
copy, CCPS’ response indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendation(s).
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 43 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 11
CCPS did not audit or adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrators that provide health care claims processing services
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish procedures to independently verify the propriety of TPA billings;
b. conduct pharmacy TPA audits to assess that all drug rebates due were received;
c. conduct claims audits to assess the accuracy and validity of claim reimbursements made
by the TPAs; and
d. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPAs’ compliance
with reported performance measures and assess penalties when performance goals are
not met.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2023
Please provide details of We began receiving this data on a monthly basis from one of our health
corrective action or insurance companies in the summer of 2022 to verify our claims. The
explain disagreement. CCPS Benefits Department has requested backup data from each of the
other TPAs to support the amount on each claims invoice. This
supporting documentation will be used to verify claims invoices.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Once per
contract cycle
Please provide details of The contract included a requirement of funds related to the completion
corrective action or of a claims audit. Upon approval of this recommendation to continue
explain disagreement. services with the current vendor at our Board of Education meeting on
12/13/23, CCPS will begin the new contract on 9/1/24. During the three
year contract period (9/1/24 - 8/31/27), an audit of rebate dollars
awarded to CCPS will be conducted.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 44 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 11c Agree Estimated Completion Date: As each
contract is
renewed
Please provide details of The contract included a requirement of funds related to the completion
corrective action or of a claims audit. Upon approval of this recommendation to continue
explain disagreement. services with our current vendor at our Board of Education meeting on
12/13/23, CCPS will begin the new contract on 9/1/24. During the three
year contract period (9/124 - 8/31/27), a one time independent audit of
claims dollars charged to CCPS will be conducted.
Recommendation 11d Agree Estimated Completion Date: As each
contract is
renewed
Please provide details of Our consultant works directly with the TPAs to collect data with respect
corrective action or to performance goals. The consultant and the TPA share this data with
explain disagreement. CCPS annually during the annual plan reviews. An annual plan review
is held for each TPA in conjunction with the consultant and a written
report/summary is also provided. If performance guarantees are not met,
CCPS receives a rebate based on the conditions in the contract.
CCPS will work with the consultant to add a clause to all future RFPs
that the TPA must utilize an outside vendor to conduct a performance
guarantee audit annually.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 45 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Thomas J. Kraemer
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Staff Auditors