Title: Baltimore Police Department - A Review of Overtime Policies, Procedures, and Activity
Date: 01/17/2024
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=65a8507dc560acfa1ea107c1
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:11:37.604369
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Baltimore Police Department
A Review of Overtime Policies, Procedures, and Activity
January 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 17, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of certain management practices of the Baltimore Police Department
(BPD) as required by State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. This is the fourth of four planned audits during the first six-
year audit cycle of BPD. The scope of this audit focused on an evaluation of
BPD’s policies and procedures for overtime practices, activity of sworn officers,
and certain related human resource and payroll functions related to overtime. Our
audit covered overtime activity for the period beginning December 20, 2020 with
BPD’s implementation of Baltimore City’s new human resource, payroll, and
timekeeping system (Workday) and ending June 30, 2022.
In general, officers at the rank of lieutenant and below are eligible to receive
overtime compensation at one and a half times their regular rate of pay for any
time worked in excess of their scheduled shift (regardless of whether the officer
works 40 regular hours in the week). There are two types of overtime available to
BPD officers, Departmental Overtime and Secondary Employment Overtime.
Departmental overtime accounts for the majority of BPD overtime costs and
relates to officers working hours in addition to their regularly scheduled shift for
the purpose of performing police duties. BPD also provides for secondary
employment opportunities where BPD makes officers available to provide certain
law enforcement/security duties to other entities beyond the officer’s regular BPD
policing duties and shift schedule. According to BPD’s records, overtime
payments, including both Departmental and Secondary Employment, totaled
approximately $66.5 million paid between January 2021 and June 2022.

--- Page 4 ---
Overtime at police departments nationwide has been an area of great public
interest, attention, and scrutiny. In addition, high levels of overtime spending at
police departments nationwide are commonly attributable to shortages in
positions and vacancies. As shown in the background of this report, although
BPD vacancies have increased from 204 to 476 positions between fiscal years
2018 and 2022, overtime generally decreased during the same period, and based
on BPD records, approximately 29 percent of BPD’s fiscal year 2022 overtime
was directly attributable to position shortages and vacancies. However, BPD
advised us that vacancies as of September 2023 have significantly increased to
753 positions, which has also resulted in increased overtime.
Although BPD implemented several new overtime policies in conjunction with
Workday, the necessary corresponding procedures to control and ensure
compliance with overtime requirements, especially effective oversight and
monitoring, had not yet been implemented at the time of our audit and are
reflected in several of the following findings.
Our audit disclosed that supervisory personnel at all levels, including front-line
supervisors, command, and administrative management, did not exercise the
necessary oversight and disciplinary action to effectively monitor overtime and
ensure compliance with BPD’s policies and procedures. We noted numerous
deficiencies relating to the use, payment, and monitoring of overtime.
Furthermore, these conditions occurred for extended periods without being
identified and resolved and contributed to excessive overtime being paid to
certain officers. BPD also did not have procedures to analyze overtime activity to
evaluate the necessity and propriety of consistently high levels of overtime paid to
certain officers. Our analysis disclosed 100 officers (included in Exhibit 4 of our
report) who recorded more than 1,000 hours of overtime in fiscal year 2022,
including 7 that earned more than $100,000 in overtime. Additional analysis of
the 10 officers with the most hours worked disclosed that overtime worked by and
paid to these officers routinely violated certain key overtime requirements.
In addition, we found that BPD did not conduct required reviews to ensure that
officers did not work more than 32 hours of voluntary overtime per week as
required by its policy. Our analysis identified 268 individuals who exceeded the
limit a total of 693 times during fiscal year 2022. Furthermore, BPD did not
conduct quarterly audits of overtime activity as required by its policy. These
audits are intended to provide an independent assessment and evaluation of
officer and supervisor compliance with overtime requirements, ensuring that
supervisory reviews were appropriately performed and that overtime recorded is
associated with work products.
2

--- Page 5 ---
Our audit also disclosed that BPD did not have procedures and controls to
monitor preauthorization required for certain types of overtime. Our analysis of
overtime requiring preauthorization disclosed that the majority of overtime
requests (71 percent) were approved after the overtime was worked. Furthermore,
BPD did not have sufficient procedures for identifying, preventing, and correcting
uncategorized overtime. Between January 2021 and June 2022, approximately
$16.7 million in overtime was not properly categorized. Categorizing overtime is
essential to management’s ability to monitor compliance with overtime
requirements and for proper recordkeeping and accounting for overtime activity.
We also found several deficiencies over secondary employment procedures and
controls. Specifically, our review disclosed that BPD’s policies were not
sufficient, current agreements with entities employing officers were not
maintained, and required monitoring efforts were not performed.
Finally, as previously noted, this is the last of the four financial management
practice audits for the initial six-year audit cycle of the BPD required by State
law. With recent State legislation and current City actions to formally transition
BPD from a State agency to full City agency status, under City control, the
Committee may want to consider amending the audit statute to reflect the new
nature of BPD.
BPD’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address the audit
issues. While BPD generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we
identified one statement in the response requiring an “auditor’s comment” to
further explain our position. Additionally, in accordance with our policy, we have
edited BPD’s response to remove vendor names or products.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by BPD
and other Baltimore City government employees. We also wish to acknowledge
BPD’s willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objective, and Methodology 8
Audit Scope 8
Objective and Methodology 9
Conclusions 10
Fieldwork and Agency Response 11
Background Information 12
Agency Responsibilities 12
Baltimore Police Department (BPD) Positions, Expenditures, and 13
Funding Sources
Workday 14
Concerns with Police Department Overtime 16
BPD Overtime 17
BPD Overtime Payments 25
Findings and Recommendations 27
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
Finding 1 – BPD supervisory personnel at all levels did not exercise 27
the necessary oversight and disciplinary action to effectively
monitor overtime and to ensure compliance with BPD’s policies and
procedures.
Finding 2 – BPD did not have procedures to analyze overtime activity 30
to evaluate the necessity and propriety of consistently high levels of
overtime paid to certain officers. Our analysis disclosed 100
officers who recorded more than 1,000 hours of overtime in fiscal
year 2022, including 7 that earned more than $100,000 in overtime.
Finding 3 – BPD did not conduct required reviews to ensure that officers 34
were limited to no more than 32 hours of voluntary overtime per
week, and our analysis identified 268 individuals who exceeded the
limit a total of 693 times during fiscal year 2022.
Finding 4 – BPD did not conduct quarterly audits of overtime activity 36
as required by its Policy.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 5 – BPD did not have procedures and controls to monitor 36
preauthorization required for certain types of overtime, and our
analysis disclosed that the required preauthorization was generally
not obtained.
Finding 6 – BPD did not have sufficient procedures for identifying, 38
preventing, and correcting uncategorized overtime, including
approximately $16.7 million in overtime paid between January
2021and June 2022.
Secondary Employment
Finding 7 – BPD’s policy on secondary employment overtime did not 40
address certain International Association of Chiefs of Police best
practices, and certain policies were not sufficiently comprehensive.
Finding 8 (Policy Issue) – BPD did not have approved overtime policies 41
for its wide-load escorts program and consequently could not assess
the impact of this work on officer performance and whether it
contributed to officer fatigue.
Finding 9 – BPD did not always maintain current executed agreements 43
with third-party entities employing officers for internal secondary
employment.
Finding 10 – BPD performed virtually no monitoring of external 44
secondary employment and did not maintain a complete record of
officers and entities approved for external secondary employment.
Exhibit 1 – Steps and Tests Performed to Evaluate BPD’s Procedures and 46
Controls for Overtime
Exhibit 2 – Summaries of Overtime by Activity Code – Discretionary 48
(Voluntary) and Non-Discretionary (Involuntary)
December 20, 2020 to June 30, 2022
Exhibit 3 – Key Requirements from BPD’s Manual for Payroll Processes 50
and Overtime Policy
Exhibit 4 – Officers That Worked More Than 1,000 Hours of Overtime 51
Fiscal Year 2022
6

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 5 – List of BPD Internal Secondary Employment Sites and Test 56
Results
Agency Response Appendix
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objective, and Methodology
Audit Scope
Chapter 535 of the Laws of Maryland, 2020, effective July 1, 2020, requires the
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA), at least once every six years, to conduct an
audit or audits of the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) to evaluate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management practices of BPD. The
law also provides that the scope and objectives of the audit or audits shall be
determined by the Legislative Auditor.
OLA identified four separate audits to be conducted during the first audit cycle of
BPD (in the following order).
1. Evaluation of Purchasing and Disbursement Controls and Transactions
(Report issued October 19, 2021),
2. Asset Forfeiture and Property Control (Report issued November 30, 2021),
3. Surveillance Equipment (Report issued June 17, 2022), and
4. Human Resource Activities and Overtime.
The scope of this fourth audit focused on an evaluation of BPD’s policies and
procedures for overtime practices, activity of sworn officers, and certain related
human resource and payroll functions related to overtime.1 Our audit focused on
overtime activity for the period beginning December 20, 2020 with BPD’s
implementation of Baltimore City’s new human resource, payroll, and
timekeeping system (Workday) and ending June 30, 2022.
The audit evaluated the adequacy of BPD policies and procedures for overtime
and certain human resource and payroll functions that impacted BPD’s overtime
activity, such as scheduling. In addition, we assessed whether overtime was
subject to adequate controls and was used in accordance with BPD’s policies and
procedures. We also assessed BPD’s management of overtime as compared to
applicable best practices and policy requirements. Our audit did not include an
evaluation of procedures and controls over other earnings, such as bonus, penalty,
and shift differential pay, compensatory leave earned in lieu of overtime
payments, or reimbursements to BPD by other entities for certain secondary
employment activity. To the extent it has not yet done so, it will be necessary for
BPD to determine Workday’s impact on those other payroll areas, which were
excluded from our audit (with the exception of secondary employment).
1 Although civilian employees can earn overtime, overtime paid to sworn officers constituted the
vast majority of BPD overtime. In addition, for the purposes of this audit, overtime includes
Departmental Overtime and Secondary Employment activity as described later in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
Objective and Methodology
Our audit objective was to evaluate the adequacy of BPD policy requirements,
procedures, and controls for ensuring that overtime activity was appropriate, and
to determine, based on this evaluation and related testing, whether overtime
activity complied with these requirements, procedures, and controls.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable Baltimore City Charter and
laws, regulations and other requirements, best practices, and standard operating
procedures and policies established by BPD regarding overtime and related
payroll and human resource activities. Additionally, we compared BPD’s written
policies and procedures to best practices for overtime, published by the
International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP), and to documented practices
in place at certain other police departments within Maryland to evaluate the
adequacy of BPD’s policies and procedures.
In addition, our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate BPD personnel
at all levels of operations and management, inspection of documents and records,
tests of transactions and controls, and to the extent practicable, observations of
BPD’s operations. Exhibit 1 further details the steps and tests performed to
accomplish our objective.
We obtained several reports and extracts from Workday such as bi-weekly,
monthly, and annual payroll and overtime reports, leave and scheduling reports,
and user access reports for selected periods of time within our audit period. We
also obtained data files of BPD’s general ledger activity from the City’s financial
system for the period of July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2022 (for historical overtime
activity). We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined these
data files and reports were sufficiently reliable for the purposes used during the
audit. Our testing was based on a review of available electronic and hardcopy
records and data within Workday and interviews with key personnel involved in
the related overtime, scheduling, and secondary employment processes.
We also obtained view-only access to Workday, which is used to process, control,
and perform key scheduling, payroll, and overtime activities. This access was
9

--- Page 12 ---
used to review system controls (such as approvals) and user access; scheduling,
payroll, and overtime records; and other critical information pertaining to
evaluating procedures and testing specific transactions. Finally, we performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objective.
Our assessment was based on the policies and procedures in place at the time of
our fieldwork and compliance with these policies and procedures. Our tests of
transactions and other auditing procedures were generally focused on the
transactions occurring during our audit period of December 20, 2020 to June 30,
2022, but may include transactions before or after this period as we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed. In addition to the conditions included in this report,
other less significant findings were communicated to BPD that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
Conclusions
Our audit disclosed that supervisory personnel at all levels within BPD did not
exercise the necessary oversight and disciplinary action to effectively monitor
overtime incurred by officers and to ensure compliance with critical overtime
requirements (Finding 1). As a result, other deficiencies relating to the use,
payment, and monitoring of overtime routinely occurred for extended periods
without being identified and resolved and, in our opinion, contributed to excessive
overtime being paid to certain officers.
In addition, BPD did not have procedures to analyze overtime activity to evaluate
the necessity and propriety of unusually high levels of overtime routinely incurred
by and paid to certain officers (Finding 2). Furthermore, BPD did not ensure
officers did not exceed established limits on overtime (Finding 3). We also noted
10

--- Page 13 ---
noncompliance with several policy and procedural requirements, including the
failure to conduct overtime audits (Finding 4), to ensure overtime was
preauthorized (Finding 5), and to properly categorize overtime (Finding 6).
Furthermore, certain procedures and controls specific to secondary employment
were not adequate. Specifically, BPD’s policy on secondary employment did not
sufficiently address certain IACP best practices and had certain other deficiencies
(Finding 7), certain overtime practices used for wide-load escorts were not
formally approved, and BPD did not have procedures and controls in place to
monitor this activity (Finding 8). In addition, current agreements between BPD
and other entities for secondary employment were not maintained (Finding 9).
Finally, BPD did not maintain a complete record of officers and entities approved
for external secondary employment, and BPD performed virtually no monitoring
as required (Finding 10).
Other processes reviewed and tested, such as compliance with restrictions on
working overtime while on leave, use of correct overtime pay rates, and user
access to Workday appeared to be appropriate and in accordance with BPD’s
policies and procedures and applicable best practices.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from June 1, 2022 to April 14, 2023. A copy of the
draft report was provided to BPD. The responses to our findings and
recommendations from BPD appear as an appendix to this audit report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise BPD regarding the results of our review of its
response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore Police Department (BPD) is an agency and instrumentality of the
State, established under Article 4 ‐ Section 16 of the Code of Public Local Laws
of Maryland. BPD safeguards the lives and properties of persons within the areas
under the control of Baltimore City (City) and assists in securing protection under
the law for all persons. Authority to appoint the Police Commissioner was
transferred from the Governor to the Mayor of Baltimore, effective July 1, 1978.
The Police Commissioner has the full authority and responsibility for directing
and supervising the operations and affairs of BPD. Legislation in 2021 and 2022
was passed in the State and City and ratified by the voters of Baltimore City in the
2022 general election to transfer control of BPD to the City. As of February 3,
2022, local control is not expected to take effect until at least October 1, 2024.
As depicted in Figure 1, there are four bureaus within BPD, each of which reports
to a Deputy Commissioner and includes various units or sections with distinct
functions and responsibilities. The Operations Bureau is responsible for most of
BPD policing efforts and accounts for the majority of overtime. The other three
Bureaus perform oversight, accountability, support, and administrative functions.
Figure 1
Summary of Bureaus and Key Sections or Units
Bureau Key Sections or Units
Operations Patrol (including nine districts, Special Operations, and Special
Bureau Events/Secondary Employment), Criminal Investigation (including
Homicide/Robbery, Anti-Crime, and Special Investigations), and Data
Driven Strategies (including Homeland Security & Intelligence)
Public Integrity Public Integrity (including Special Investigations Response Team and
Bureau Investigations) and Equal Opportunity & Diversity
Compliance Technology, Consent Decree Implementation, Equity Officer, Education &
Bureau Training, Performance Standards (including Audits & Inspections), and
Communications & Records Management
Administrative Finance, Recruitment & Administrative Duties, Officer Safety & Wellness,
Bureau Forensic Sciences & Evidence Services, Crime Scene & Evidence
Management, and Human Resources
Source: Baltimore Police Department organizational chart
12

--- Page 15 ---
BPD Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
According to BPD personnel records, BPD’s fiscal year 2022 appropriation
provided for 3,195 authorized positions including 2,638 sworn officers and 557
civilian (non-sworn) personnel. These totals represent the maximum number of
positions BPD was permitted to fill based on its fiscal year 2022 budget
appropriation approved by the City. The vacancy totals noted in Figure 2 on the
following page, represent the portion of those maximum positions that were
unfilled as of June 30, 2022 according to BPD internal staffing records.
References to officer shortages higher than the vacancy total, such as those found
in media accounts, normally include the vacancy total plus the number of
additional positions needed for BPD to be considered fully staffed based on a
2020 Consent Decree hearing.
According to City records, during fiscal year 2022, expenditures totaled
approximately $529.7 million, including $425.3 million for payroll related
expenses, including overtime. BPD expenditures are primarily funded through
the City’s general fund.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 2
BPD Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 85.1%
Sworn Officers 2,246
Civilians 473
Vacant 14.9%
Sworn Officers 392
Civilians 84
Total 3,195
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries and Other Personnel Costs $425,279,383 80.3%
Operating Expenses 104,443,562 19.7%
Total $529,722,945
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
City General Fund $499,586,469 94.3%
State Fund 16,517,206 3.1%
City Special Fund 10,560,085 2.0%
Federal Fund 3,059,185 0.6%
Total $529,722,945
Source: City financial and personnel records
Workday
In June 2019, Baltimore City awarded a contract to replace its manual and
automated systems. Workday is enterprise resource planning software used by
many state and local governments, including Maryland State Agencies for its
human resources management, benefits and time tracking system. The Workday
Project was planned to be implemented by the City government in three distinct
phases as depicted in Figure 3 on the following page.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 3
Workday Project Phases
Source: Baltimore City Workday website
Phase I included the replacement of Baltimore City’s human resource, payroll,
and timekeeping system. The human resources component was implemented on
October 6, 2020 for the entire City, including BPD, while the payroll and
timekeeping component was implemented through a staggered rollout. BPD
started using Workday for its payroll and timekeeping effective December 20,
2020. It is intended to enhance transparency and control by replacing activities
previously performed manually. For example, Workday establishes automated
controls and approvals and allows for greater accountability and monitoring of
overtime through real-time data and reporting tools, such as identifying instances
where employees worked outside of their approved regular work schedule.
As part of the implementation of Workday, BPD transitioned from paying based
on work schedules and manually-submitted paper overtime slips to a ‘punch to
pay’ model that requires officers to record actual time worked. There are
generally three ways for BPD officers to record their actual time worked:
1) Directly in Workday through an electronic device, such as a computer,
tablet, or BPD-issued cellular phone connected to a BPD network;
2) Biometric Time Clock located at BPD facilities where recorded time
automatically interfaces with Workday; and
3) Manual Form submitted to and entered into Workday by supervisory or
administrative personnel.
The City experienced numerous human resource and payroll related issues during
the first several months after the implementation of Workday in December 2020.
In response, the Baltimore City Council adopted a Resolution Bill to hold an
15

--- Page 18 ---
investigative hearing to discuss the development and implementation process of
Workday; what focus groups or other workgroups were created to identify
potential problems during the development process; what offline performance
tests were conducted to identify potential gaps in service delivery capabilities; and
what corrective processes have been put in place to remedy the countless
problems that the City has faced during this implementation process. According
to the Resolution Bill,
… despite soaring expectations, the rollout of Workday was flawed
from the outset, with hundreds of City employees being negatively
impacted... many employees have been underpaid or not paid
entirely since the Workday rollout. In some cases, employees have
not been paid for 6 weeks. This has caused an enormous financial
strain among our city employees…
In its presentation to the Baltimore City Council, the Baltimore City Office of
Information and Technology (BCIT) reported that, as of February 10, 2021,
approximately one and a half months after initial rollout, there were 61 issues
identified relating to data integrity, system configurations, and problems resulting
from human error that were being addressed. According to BPD management,
while Workday has since been stabilized, BPD was greatly impacted by the issues
during the initial rollout of Workday and, as of August 2022, continued to
experience issues with Workday that impacted payroll operations that have been
reported to BCIT for resolution.
Concerns with Police Department Overtime
Overtime at Police Departments nationwide has been an area of great public
interest, attention, and scrutiny. According to a study sponsored by the National
Institute of Justice,2 overtime is an unavoidable cost of policing which can be
controlled through a combination of analysis, recordkeeping, management, and
supervision.3 According to the report,
2 A research, development, and evaluation agency of the federal Department of Justice’s Office of
Justice Programs.
3 Bayley, David H. and Worden, Robert E. May 1998. “Police Overtime: An Examination of Key
Issues.” National Institute of Justice Research in Brief.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Overtime should be viewed, within limits, as an unavoidable cost of
policing. Overtime charges cannot be eliminated altogether,
regardless of the number of police officers employed, because of
inevitable shift extensions, court appearances, unpredictable events,
and contract requirements. Concerns about overtime usage should
be addressed through controlling overtime usage with improved
management techniques.
Specific concerns with overtime at BPD were raised in both the media and in an
October 2018 Baltimore City Department of Audits (DOA) report on BPD
overtime.4 The audit generally concluded that BPD lacked internal controls that
would allow BPD to ensure that all overtime hours were necessary, appropriate,
and actually worked when recorded. Observations reported by DOA included:
 A lack of command accountability and resistance to change,
 Barriers to effective monitoring and supervision, and
 BPD’s reliance on manual systems/lack of technology.
The report included 15 recommendations to increase control over overtime
spending, and to move BPD toward optimized internal controls such as updating
policies on leave, overtime, and accountability for non-compliance, training,
monitoring and auditing, and use of technology to better control, track, and
monitor overtime. Our audit did not include a review of the current status of these
recommendations, as that follow-up is the responsibility of the DOA.
BPD Overtime
In general, officers at the rank of lieutenant and below are eligible to receive
overtime compensation at one and a half times their regular rate of pay in the
form of a payment or time off for any time worked in excess of their scheduled
shift (regardless of whether the officer works 40 regular hours in the week). As
depicted in Figure 4 on the following page, each day consists of three shifts, with
each shift scheduled to last 8.5 hours, with certain overlap between shifts.
4 At the time of our reporting, the overtime audit report was at the following link: Report on
Overtime at the Baltimore Police Department (this link to the report on the DOA website was
active at the time of our audit report issuance, and its continued functionality cannot be
guaranteed).
17

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 4
Daily Shift Schedules
Shift Shift
Shift Shift End
Start Length
Day (B) 6:45 a.m. 3:15 p.m. 8.5 hours
Evening (C) 2:45 p.m. 11:15 p.m. 8.5 hours
Midnight (A) 10:45 p.m. 7:15 a.m. 8.5 hours
Source: BPD collective bargaining agreements
There are two types of overtime available to BPD officers, Departmental
Overtime and Secondary Employment Overtime (see Figure 5 on the following
page). Policies and procedures, as well as accounting and payment practices
including who is ultimately responsible for the costs of overtime incurred differ
between each type and category of overtime as further described below.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 5
Overview of Types of Overtime at BPD
Overtime
All overtime is subject to established
BPD policies and procedures.
Departmental Secondary Employment
Activity directly related to BPD Voluntary work for a third party,
policing mission. governmental or private.
Costs are borne by BPD. Costs are borne by third party.
Discretionary Non-
Internal External
(Voluntary) Discretionary
10 Types as (Involuntary) Based on agreement Based on agreement
detailed in 12 Types as between BPD and between individual
Exhibit 2. detailed in third party. BPD officer and third party.
provides officers, Requires disclosure to
Exhibit 2.
normally uniformed. and approval by BPD.
Non-
Uniformed
Uniformed
Normally May or may
for some not be for
type of security
security purposes
purpose.
Paid to officer by BPD through Workday (Reimbursed by Paid to officer directly
third party if Secondary Employment). by third-party.
Source: BPD’s Manual for Payroll Processes, Overtime Policy, and Secondary Employment Policy
Departmental Overtime
Departmental overtime accounts for the majority of BPD overtime costs and
relates to officers working hours in addition to their regularly scheduled shift for
the purpose of performing police duties. This overtime can be discretionary
(voluntary) or non-discretionary (involuntary).5 Discretionary overtime occurs
when the officer volunteers to work overtime when it becomes available, and non-
discretionary overtime is mandated for a specific officer. This distinction is
important because different overtime requirements and restrictions apply to each.
5 BPD also accounts for court overtime separately when officers are required to appear in court
when off-duty as shown in Figure 6.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Departmental overtime is further categorized into 22 activity codes (10 different
categories for discretionary and 12 different categories for non-discretionary).
See Exhibit 2 in the back of this report for a breakdown of overtime hours and
dollars by each code.
Any activity not assigned to an activity code is treated as uncategorized
(uncategorized overtime is in fact a violation of BPD policy and is addressed in
finding 6 of this report). As noted in Figure 6 below, approximately 41 percent of
the departmental overtime was related to discretionary activity codes and 29
percent was related to non-discretionary activity codes. The remaining overtime
was either uncategorized or related to off-duty/other overtime codes.
Figure 6
Summary of Departmental Overtime Payments
December 20, 2020 to June 30, 2022
Percent
Activity Code Hours Payments
of Total
Discretionary (Voluntary) 397,535 $23,807,534 41.1%
Non-Discretionary (Involuntary) 288,397 16,673,108 28.8%
Uncategorized6 281,690 16,693,445 28.8%
Off-Duty Court and Other Codes 12,479 782,050 1.3%
Total 980,101 $57,956,137
Source: Workday payroll reports
Secondary Employment
BPD also provides for secondary employment opportunities where BPD makes
officers available to provide certain law enforcement/security duties to other
entities. Costs of the secondary employment are borne by the other entity,
(payroll costs may be initially paid by BPD then reimbursed by the entity or the
officer may be paid directly by the third-party entity). Secondary employment is
normally conducted beyond the officer’s regular BPD policing duties and shift
schedule, such as providing certain agreed upon security services to another State
or local government unit or to a private entity.
6 Uncategorized relates to departmental overtime that was not specifically categorized when
recording time worked as required. As such, BPD does not readily know what the overtime
relates to without further investigation. See finding 6 for more details.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Secondary employment is primarily governed and managed through a separate
BPD unit, the Secondary Employment Unit (SEU), and a specific Secondary
Employment Policy (SEP). The SEU is responsible for managing and monitoring
secondary employment activity including approvals of employees and entities
authorized to participate in secondary employment, advising officers of available
secondary employment, scheduling certain secondary employment shifts, and
overseeing time worked. By its nature, secondary employment is normally
voluntary.
Although the SEU is responsible for managing secondary employment, there are
two types of secondary employment: internal and external. SEU staff
acknowledged to us that the nature of external secondary employment
significantly impacts the level of oversight BPD can effectively exercise over
secondary employment, as well as the level of recordkeeping and the method of
payment.
 Internal Secondary Employment – refers to work performed by uniformed
officers in law enforcement/security related activities for a third party that is
conditioned on the actual or potential use of law enforcement powers. Prime
examples are providing security services for the Maryland Stadium Authority
at Baltimore Orioles and Baltimore Ravens home games or for a private
entity, such as Johns Hopkins University. The SEU manages third-party
agreements for these services, makes the work available to officers, and
oversees scheduling. SEU also works with the Special Events Unit to
coordinate staffing for major City special events, such as the Baltimore
Marathon.
Time worked is recorded and paid through Workday, the same as
departmental overtime. Officers are paid a specified rate agreed to by BPD
and the third party, which may be one and a half times the officer’s regular
pay rate (normal overtime rate) or a different agreed-upon rate. BPD is
subsequently reimbursed by the third-party for these payments. Internal
secondary employment payments totaled approximately $8.5 million for
124,000 hours between December 20, 2020 and June 30, 2022.
 External Secondary Employment – refers to both uniformed and non-
uniformed services provided to a third party, usually a private entity, where
the officer may, like with internal secondary employment, potentially use their
police powers. With external secondary employment, the officer enters into
their own agreement with the entity regarding services and payment, and the
officer is effectively an employee of the entity. For example, an officer could
21

--- Page 24 ---
provide plainclothes security for a retail establishment, such as a grocery
store.
Although the SEP addresses certain requirements and restrictions relating to
external secondary employment, the SEU does not manage external secondary
employment work schedules, and officers are paid directly by the third-party
entity outside of Workday at a rate agreed to by the officer and the entity.
Since this activity is outside of Workday and not otherwise captured, BPD
staff advised us that the exact amount of such activity cannot be readily
determined.
BPD does not consider or classify secondary employment, both internal and
external, as overtime, in part because BPD is not responsible for the associated
costs. However, there are formal provisions included in BPD’s payroll and
overtime policies that apply to both departmental overtime and secondary
employment (such as weekly limits on the number of hours allowed to be
worked), and BPD must approve an officer’s suitability for secondary
employment. In addition, this activity is managed and monitored at varying levels
by the SEU, and the officers’ police powers at these events or entities are granted
through their employment with BPD.
Finally, and although we have no direct evidence of this, we believe it is
reasonable to conclude that the number of extra hours worked in secondary
employment (as with overtime) could negatively impact an officer’s effectiveness
and efficiency (such as resulting in officer fatigue) when working their regular
BPD shift. Consequently, for all the aforementioned reasons, we have included
secondary employment as overtime for purposes of this audit.
Overtime Request, Approval, and Payment through Workday
All overtime, except for external secondary employment, is processed through
Workday. BPD’s policies and procedures establish certain requirements that
should be occurring relating to overtime, however the only mandated requirement
proactively enforced through Workday is that overtime cannot be paid without an
approved overtime request and a corresponding approved time entry in Workday.
For example, the general processing of discretionary (voluntary) departmental
overtime follows a seven-step process as depicted in Figure 7 on the following
page.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 7
Discretionary (Voluntary) Department Overtime Process
•Overtime Request is Created in Workday
An overtime request is created by the officer in Workday and should include certain critical information such as
STEP 1 the hours being requested, who is supervising the overtime, where the overtime work is to take place, and a
description of the work. This request should be created (and approved) before the overtime hours are worked.
•Overtime Request is Approved by Supervisor
The overtime request is submitted to the officer's direct supervisor, and the supervisor is required to ensure
STEP 2 overtime duties are only used as necessity dictates and are accurate. The overtime request should be reviewed
and approved in Workday before the overtime hours are worked.
•Overtime is Worked
The officer works the overtime. Work performed is recorded in various systems and on manual forms as
STEP 3 needed, similar to when an officer works regular time.
•Time is Entered into Workday
The officer records the time actually worked (including regular and overtime) in Workday through one of three
STEP 4 methods: 1) Directly into Workday through an electronic device (computer, tablet, or department issued
cellular phone; 2) Biometric time clock located at BPD facilities; or 3) manual form submitted to supervisory
and administrative personnel. Time entry also includes the overtime category, the cost center (unit for which
the work was performed), and any additional comments.
•Time Entry Approved by Supervisor
Supervisors are required to review time entries for their subordinates on a regular basis (such as daily) and
STEP 5 approve time each week. Supervisors should verify that the time recorded corresponds to time actually worked
and that time worked corresponds to the officers schedule or approved overtime request.
•Payroll Reviewed and Submitted
During each payroll cycle, BPD administrative personnel generate various payroll reports to ensure that all
STEP 6 officers have prepared and approved time submitted for the pay period. In addition, administrative personnel
attempt to resolve certain payroll issues/errors, such as no time reported and regular hours worked that deviated
from the officers approved schedule.
•Payment
The Baltimore City Department of Finance finalizes payroll for the entire City, including BPD, and performs a
STEP 7 similar review as noted in Step 6 to resolve potential payroll issues. Once approved, pay data from Workday is
submitted to the City's bank for payment to City employees.
Source: BPD’s Manual for Payroll Processes and Overtime Policy
For non-discretionary (involuntary) departmental overtime, the process is
generally the same except that the overtime request may be created and approved
after the hours have been worked due to the nature of the overtime (Steps 1 and
2). For internal secondary employment, since this work generally occurs outside
a BPD facility, time is recorded and certified by supervisory personnel on a
manual form, which is then manually entered into Workday by administrative
personnel (Step 4). This time is still submitted to the officer's direct supervisor
for review and approval in Workday.
23

--- Page 26 ---
External secondary employment is not processed through Workday as this is
scheduled and paid directly by a third-party entity.
Overtime Policies, Procedures, and Requirements
Overtime and related human resource and payroll processes are subject to a
variety of regulatory, agreed upon, and internal requirements primarily including
those described in the federal Fair Labor Standards Act, various collective
bargaining agreements, BPD internal directives from the Police Commissioner,
and approved manuals and policies. In addition, BPD is mandated to comply with
strict scheduling requirements established in the collective bargaining agreements,
such as number of shifts, timing of shifts, time off requirements and procedures,
and vacation bidding procedures. The purpose of these requirements is to provide
scheduling consistency for officers and allow BPD to manage its entire workforce
to ensure adequate resources are provided for each shift and district throughout
the year.
Prior to May 2019, BPD overtime activity was primarily governed by a policy
dating back more than 30 years. In 2019, BPD’s Police Commissioner began to
issue directives changing certain overtime policy requirements which were
eventually promulgated in two documents.
 The Manual for Payroll Processes (Manual) took effect on March 10, 2022,
and replaced BPD’s prior payroll manual, which dated back to 1987. The
Manual includes responsibilities, restrictions, requirements, and monitoring
procedures relating to time entry, overtime, leave requests and other general
payroll processes.
 The Overtime Policy (Policy) took effect on June 6, 2022 and included several
of the aforementioned directives from the Manual, plus additional provisions
that further detailed monitoring and oversight requirements from supervisory,
command, and fiscal personnel, and additional details on audit requirements.
In addition, the SEP was updated in April 2022 and establishes requirements and
restrictions for secondary employment, including eligibility for officers,
authorization of entities, and oversight functions. The new directives were
intended to help reduce officer fatigue and improve safety, as well as to better
manage and control overtime. Key BPD Manual and Policy requirements are
shown in Exhibit 3.7
7 Exhibit 3 reflects the most updated version of key requirements at the time of this report. Our
review relied upon requirements that were in place at the time of the activity being reviewed as
there were several updates that occurred during the audit period.
24

--- Page 27 ---
It should also be noted that certain restrictions exist that can limit BPD’s ability to
minimize overtime. For example, the collective bargaining agreements prohibit
BPD from modifying officers approved schedules in an effort to avoid overtime.
According to the agreements,
An employee’s scheduled days off or approved leave shall not be
changed or cancelled solely for the purpose of avoiding the payment
of overtime … The Employer shall not vary or rearrange an
employee’s scheduled tour of duty hours to avoid the payment of
overtime …
BPD Overtime Payments
BPD’s overtime fluctuated between fiscal years 2018 and 2022 with an overall
decrease from $53.6 million to $45.9 million (see Figure 8).
Figure 8
BPD Overtime Payments and Vacancies
(Fiscal Years 2018 to 2022)
$60,000,000 500
$50,000,000
400
$40,000,000
300
$30,000,000
200
$20,000,000
$10,000,000 100
$0 0
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Total Overtime Payments $53,627,213 $54,883,596 $48,074,282 $40,453,612 $45,945,594
Vacancies 204 164 301 320 476
Source: City accounting records
According to BPD management, overtime decreased because of several
significant changes to BPD’s payroll operations, such as implementation of
stricter payroll and overtime policies and a new payroll and timekeeping system.
In fiscal year 2022, overtime increased by approximately $5 million from fiscal
year 2021, which according to BPD management primarily resulted from
vacancies and initiatives for crime reduction and suppression (generally, the
validation of these causes and their correlation to overtime trends was not within
the scope of this audit).
High levels of overtime spending at police departments nationwide are commonly
attributable to shortages in positions (appropriated positions being less than what
25

--- Page 28 ---
is needed by the department) and vacancies (appropriated positions that are not
filled). As depicted in Figure 8, BPD vacancies increased from 204 to 476
positions between fiscal years 2018 and 2022 while overtime generally decreased
during the same period. Furthermore, according to available overtime records,
approximately 29 percent of BPD’s fiscal year 2022 overtime was directly
attributable to position shortages and vacancies. According to BPD management,
this reverse trend is primarily the result of significant operational changes
implemented by BPD to control and reduce overtime.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
Finding 1
Baltimore City Police Department (BPD) supervisory personnel at all levels
did not exercise the necessary oversight and disciplinary action to effectively
monitor overtime and to ensure compliance with BPD’s policies and
procedures.
Analysis
BPD supervisory personnel at all levels did not exercise the necessary oversight
and disciplinary action to effectively monitor overtime and ensure compliance
with BPD’s Manual for Payroll Processes (Manual) and its Overtime Policy
(Policy). Although BPD had recently implemented several new processes,
systems (including Workday), and policies to help manage and control overtime,
these efforts were undermined by a lack of consistent and diligent enforcement by
front-line supervisory personnel. Furthermore, command and administrative
management personnel did not effectively use available overtime data to monitor
the use of overtime or take disciplinary action to establish accountability and deter
repeated violations when warranted.
We noted numerous deficiencies relating to the use, payment, and monitoring of
overtime as noted below and in subsequent findings. These conditions occurred
for extended periods without being identified and resolved and contributed to
excessive overtime being paid to certain officers.
Front-Line Supervisors
Front-line supervisors routinely approved overtime that did not comply with
BPD’s policies and procedures. BPD’s Manual and Policy require all overtime to
be requested and approved in Workday. Approval is granted by the officer’s
immediate supervisor or a supervisor in the officer’s chain of command. These
supervisors have the authority and responsibility to prevent and deny unnecessary
overtime to ensure strict adherence to requirements prior to overtime being
worked or approved. Our testing and analyses disclosed a consistent
departmentwide lack of effective and meaningful front-line supervisory review.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Specifically, as detailed in other findings included in this audit report, we noted
that front-line supervisors:
 Did not ensure overtime was proper and was only used as necessary
(Finding 2). Our review and analyses of overtime data disclosed
numerous officers with excessive overtime, including 100 officers who
recorded more than 1,000 hours of overtime in fiscal year 2022, 7 of
whom earned more than $100,000 in overtime pay.
 Did not ensure officers did not work more than 32 hours of voluntary
overtime in a week per BPD’s Manual (Finding 3). Our analysis of fiscal
year 2022 overtime data disclosed 268 officers who exceeded the weekly
hourly limit a total of 693 times.
 Did not always approve requests for voluntary overtime before overtime
hours were worked as required (Finding 5). Our analysis of overtime
requests made between January 1, 2021 and June 30, 2022 disclosed 71
percent of the requests were approved after the end of the officer’s shift
when the overtime had already occurred.
 Did not ensure overtime was properly recorded in Workday (Finding 6).
Approximately $16.7 million in overtime expenditures were not
categorized in Workday between January 2021 and June 2022.
Command and Administrative Management Personnel
Command and administrative management personnel did not effectively use
available Workday overtime data to monitor the use of overtime or take
disciplinary action to establish accountability and prevent repeated violations.
BPD’s policies and procedures require BPD Commanders to monitor overtime
requests in order to ensure compliance with established overtime requirements, to
restrict overtime to an absolute minimum, and to ensure overtime is stringently
controlled and not abused.
Our review disclosed that no procedures, such as routinely compiling and
effectively analyzing overtime data, existed to ensure that command personnel
met these requirements.8 Furthermore, administrative management personnel did
not always perform certain required reviews and audits to monitor compliance
with the policies and procedures (Findings 3 and 4).
Command personnel also did not consistently take required disciplinary action
against those responsible for charging and approving excessive or improper
overtime. BPD’s policies and procedures provide that both the requestor and
8 Although procedures did exist at the Command level to review overtime data, this generally
related to budgetary concerns for the entire District and did not constitute a formal process to
evaluate officer or supervisor compliance with key overtime requirements.
28

--- Page 31 ---
approver of overtime be subject to disciplinary action for failing to meet related
requirements. While there were general disciplinary policies and procedures in
place when violations are identified and reported, including referral to the BPD’s
Public Integrity Bureau for investigation, such referrals were not common. In this
regard, our review of procedures at six districts and units did not identify any
formal procedures that had been implemented at the Command level to meet this
requirement. As a result, the only referrals pertaining to overtime activity
identified were a result of the limited weekly overtime limit reviews detailed in
Finding 3.
Command personnel commonly advised us that it was the front-line supervisor’s
responsibility to ensure an officer’s overtime was needed and not abused at an
officer level through the approval process and to take appropriate disciplinary
action as warranted. However, this is contrary to the written policy and
procedures and nevertheless appeared to be ineffective based on the results of our
evaluation of overtime activity. In addition, administrative management advised
that the need to focus on certain other critical tasks associated with the
implementation of the new Workday payroll system delayed its efforts to fully
monitor and enforce compliance with newly established processes and policies
relating to overtime.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BPD establish effective oversight of overtime by
supervisory personnel at all levels. Specifically, we recommend that BPD
a. ensure that front-line supervisory personnel verify that Manual and
Policy requirements are met before approving overtime,
b. establish procedures for Command personnel to effectively analyze
overtime data at all levels to ensure that front-line supervisors are
ensuring compliance with overtime requirements, and
c. take appropriate disciplinary action against those charging and
approving improper overtime.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Finding 2
BPD did not have procedures to analyze overtime activity to evaluate the
necessity and propriety of consistently high levels of overtime paid to certain
officers. Our analysis disclosed 100 officers who recorded more than 1,000
hours of overtime in fiscal year 2022, including 7 that earned more than
$100,000 in overtime.
Analysis
BPD did not have procedures to analyze overtime activity to evaluate the
necessity and propriety of unusually high levels of overtime routinely incurred by
and paid to certain officers. According to BPD’s overtime reports, 1,706 officers
worked 100 hours or more of overtime in fiscal year 2022 (a total of 729,104
hours of overtime). Our analysis of the overtime earned by these employees
disclosed that certain officers were routinely paid excessive amounts of overtime
(see Figure 9).
Specifically, our analysis disclosed that 100 officers (included in Exhibit 4 of our
report) were paid for 1,000 hours or more of total overtime in fiscal year 2022.
These 100 officers were paid approximately $7.7 million in overtime during the
year, 7 of whom were paid more than $100,000. Each officer averaged
approximately 20 to 36
hours of overtime every Figure 9
week for the entire fiscal Hours of Overtime Worked by Officer
year and between 65 and
Fiscal Year 2022
132 percent of their base
Hours of Number Number Percent
salary.
Overtime of of Total of Total
per Officer Officers Hours Hours
We further examined the
1,500 or more 4 6,836 1.0%
10 who were paid for the
1,000 to 1,499 96 113,002 15.5%
most overtime hours in
500 to 999 418 289,737 39.7%
fiscal year 20229 that
100 to 499 1,188 319,529 43.8%
represented approximately
Total 1,706 729,104 100%
$1 million in payments for
Source: Workday overtime reports
15,504 hours of overtime
(See Figure 10 on the following page). BPD records showed that the majority of
this overtime (over 90 percent) was voluntary or uncategorized.10
9 Due to salary differences, the 10 with the most hours shown in Figure 10 included some, but not
all of the previously noted 7 earning over $100,000 in overtime.
10 Involuntary overtime includes departmental non-discretionary overtime for which BPD made
the determination that the work was mandatory. Voluntary overtime includes departmental
discretionary and internal secondary employment which is normally voluntary. Uncategorized
overtime is overtime not specifically defined on time records.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Figure 10
Comparison of Overtime Earnings
to Annual Base Salary for Ten Employees with
the Highest Number of Overtime Hours
Fiscal Year 2022
Percent of
Overtime Annual Base Overtime
Employee Overtime to
Hours Salary Payments
Base Salary
Officer 1 1,938 $114,236 $151,373 132.5%
Officer 2 1,743 96,783 116,898 120.8%
Officer 3 1,578 113,178 124,311 109.8%
Officer 4 1,577 110,005 121,958 110.9%
Officer 5 1,481 82,442 89,556 108.6%
Officer 6 1,464 88,321 88,266 99.9%
Officer 7 1,445 82,442 83,892 101.8%
Officer 8 1,433 95,725 94,712 98.9%
Officer 9 1,423 75,183 73,707 98.0%
Officer 10 1,422 79,849 80,946 101.4%
Total 15,504 $947,164 $1,025,619 108.3%
Source: Workday overtime reports
For these 10 officers, we extended our review back to fiscal year 2015 using
payroll data made publicly available by the City. Our review disclosed that 7 of
10 officers more than doubled their base salary three or more times during this
eight-year period, including two officers who more than doubled their base salary
each year for all eight years. For example, Officer 1 in Figure 10 above exceeded
their annual base salary each year by approximately 127 to 152 percent resulting
in a total of $1,138,696 in overtime payments in addition to base salary earnings
of $823,808 during the eight-year period.
These 10 officers routinely violated certain key Manual and Policy requirements
relating to overtime. For example, as shown in Figure 11, each of the 10 officers
had exceeded BPD’s weekly 32-hour voluntary overtime limit at least once during
fiscal year 2022, with a combined total of 90 times. In addition, there were a
combined 141 instances in which these officers were paid for 12 hours or more of
overtime on the same day, including 6 instances of 20 overtime hours or more on
the same day. In general, most of these officers routinely worked overtime
(generally between 4 and 8 hours) after their scheduled shifts, which often
resulted in more than 16 hours of total time being worked, or they worked
significant amounts of overtime on scheduled days off or for hours outside of
31

--- Page 34 ---
their scheduled shifts on days when leave had also been taken (that is, not during
the same hours as when leave was taken).
Figure 11
Selected Overtime Data for Ten Employees
with the Highest Number of Overtime Hours
Fiscal Year 2022
Weeks with Number of Days with
More than 32 Between Between Between
Employee Hours of 12 and 16 16 and 20 20 to 24
Voluntary Overtime Overtime Overtime
Overtime Hours Hours Hours
Officer 1 31 29 7 3
Officer 2 14 17 3 3
Officer 3 1 1 0 0
Officer 4 10 9 4 0
Officer 5 1 4 0 0
Officer 6 5 6 2 0
Officer 7 10 1 6 0
Officer 8 7 15 7 0
Officer 9 6 7 8 0
Officer 10 5 7 2 0
Total 90 96 39 6
Source: Workday overtime reports
The excessive overtime was not always related to the officer’s primary duties.
For example, despite being primarily assigned to the SWAT unit, one officer
routinely worked significant amounts of overtime relating to secondary
employment such as wide-load escorts and red light/speed cameras review on
scheduled days off or on days when leave was taken. We also noted that this
officer worked more than 20 hours of overtime on three separate days, including a
22.75-hour day as shown in Figure 12 on the following page. Although the
overtime for this day was pre-approved by a supervisor and the officer had off the
previous day, working more than 22 hours of overtime in one day and for the
purposes noted appears, in our opinion, to be excessive and could subsequently
impact the officer’s performance while carrying out other assigned duties.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Figure 12
Example of 22.75-Hour Work Day for SWAT Officer
March 27, 2022
End
Start Time Hours OT Description
Time
12:00 am 6:00 am 6 Secondary Employment – Casino Security
Secondary Employment – Speed Cameras
7:00 am 12:30 pm 5.5
(review of citations, calibration of cameras)
12:31 pm 8:33 pm 8 Departmental – Crime Suppression
Secondary Employment – Speed Cameras
8:45 pm 12:00 am 3.25
(review of citations, calibration of cameras)
Source: Workday
Best practices identified by the International Association of Chiefs of Police
(IACP) relating to the analysis and management of overtime activity recommend
that supervisory and command staff should monitor individual and summary
activity reports of overtime expenditures to identify unusual, unexplained, or
disproportionate expenditures in overtime. Although BPD’s Manual and its
Policy both included provisions pertaining to the responsibilities and monitoring
efforts required from supervisory and command staff, those provisions did not
address the aforementioned IACP best practices.
BPD management advised that in general such procedures had not yet been
developed or implemented due to the challenges faced during the implementation
of Workday, new policies and procedures, and other priorities of the department.
Furthermore, BPD management relies significantly on the officers’ direct
supervisors to evaluate the necessity and propriety of overtime and to consider the
well-being of its officers. Working too many hours without a necessary rest
period has been shown to have a detrimental effect on employee health and
performance. According to an article published by the National Institute of
Justice,11 research shows that fatigued officers:
 Use more sick leave,
 Practice inappropriate uses of force more frequently,
 Become involved in more vehicle accidents,
 Have more difficulty dealing with community members and other law
enforcement agencies,
 Experience more accidental injuries, and
11 National Institute of Justice. January 5, 2009. “Impact of Sleep Deprivation on Police
Performance.” nij.ojp.gov.
33

--- Page 36 ---
 Have a higher likelihood of dying in the line of duty.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BPD
a. develop comprehensive procedures to routinely monitor overtime activity
to identify employees with potentially excessive overtime and take
appropriate action to prevent excessive overtime from being worked;
b. modify its Manual and Policy to require the specific overtime analysis and
management best practices established by IACP referenced in this
finding; and
c. investigate the necessity and propriety of excessive overtime, including
the 100 officers noted above, and take disciplinary action against the
employees and supervisors associated with any overtime earned in
violation of BPD’s policies, as deemed appropriate.
Finding 3
BPD did not conduct required reviews to ensure that officers were limited to
no more than 32 hours of voluntary overtime per week, and our analysis
identified 268 individuals who exceeded the limit a total of 693 times during
fiscal year 2022.
Analysis
BPD did not conduct required reviews to ensure that officers were limited to no
more than 32 hours of voluntary overtime per week. BPD’s Manual specifies that
employees shall not work in excess of 32 cumulative hours of discretionary
(voluntary) overtime and/or secondary employment (generally voluntary) in a
week unless approved by supervisory personnel and the related justification is
documented in Workday.12
BPD generated reports each pay period identifying individuals who reported more
than 32 hours of total overtime in a week. Our review disclosed that, as of August
2022, BPD administrative management personnel had only reviewed the reports
for 4 of the 26 pay periods during fiscal year 2022. The BPD analysis of the four
reports identified a total of 36 officers with more than 32 hours of total overtime
in those pay periods, including 21 officers with more than 32 hours of voluntary
overtime per week without justification in Workday and were determined to be
improper. However, the report excluded certain overtime, such as voluntary
overtime relating to investigations and uncategorized overtime, which could have
resulted in additional violations that were not identified by BPD.
12 Non-Discretionary (Involuntary) overtime does not count towards the 32-hour weekly limit.
34

--- Page 37 ---
We confirmed with BPD management that the excluded overtime should have
been included in determining if a violation had occurred. The aforementioned 21
officers were referred to the BPD Public Integrity Bureau for further investigation
and potential disciplinary action, such as counseling, formal reprimand, or
suspension.13
Our analysis of fiscal year 2022 overtime data disclosed 268 individuals who
exceeded the 32-hour limit for voluntary overtime a total of 693 times (see Figure
13). Exceeding the limit does
not necessarily mean a violation
Figure 13
of policy has occurred;
Officers that Exceeded the 32-
however, our review of 20 of
the 693 instances disclosed Hour Limit in Fiscal Year 2022
none had the required Range of Count of Total
documentation in Workday to Instances Employees Instances
justify exceeding the limit. More than 10 6 93
5 to 9 38 244
Limiting the number of 2 to 4 81 213
overtime hours is critical to 1 143 143
reduce officer fatigue and Total 268 693
Source: Workday overtime reports
improving safety. Such
limitations are in practice at
certain other police departments we examined.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BPD
a. review and investigate reports of potential excessive overtime to
determine if policy violations have occurred,
b. ensure that the reviews include all applicable overtime types, and
c. investigate the aforementioned 268 individuals with excessive overtime
and take appropriate corrective action.
13 According to BPD management, supervisors responsible for allowing excessive officer overtime
would be included in the Bureau’s investigative process.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Finding 4
BPD did not conduct quarterly audits of overtime activity as required by its
Policy.
Analysis
BPD did not conduct quarterly audits of overtime activity as required by its
Policy. Overtime audits have been required by BPD policy since at least July
2019 and are an essential tool to identify improper overtime activity and
ineffective supervisory review and approvals. Our review disclosed that, as of
January 2023, no audits had been conducted between December 2020 and June
2022, and BPD had not developed detailed procedures and processes governing
the scope and methodology of the audits, such as the number of individuals to be
audited, which requirements will be examined, audit documentation to be
maintained, actions required when policy violations are identified, and reporting
requirements.
The audits are to be performed by officers and civilians outside the direct chain of
command and are intended to provide an independent assessment and evaluation
of officer and supervisor compliance with Manual and Policy overtime
requirements, ensuring that appropriate supervisory reviews are performed and
that overtime recorded is associated with work products. BPD management
advised us that the audits had not been performed due to staffing limitations.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BPD
a. develop procedures and processes for quarterly audits of overtime
activity,
b. conduct quarterly audits of overtime activity as required, and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any noncompliant or unsupported
overtime.
Finding 5
BPD did not have procedures and controls to monitor preauthorization
required for certain types of overtime, and our analysis disclosed that the
required preauthorization was generally not obtained.
Analysis
BPD did not establish procedures and controls to monitor supervisory
preauthorization required by BPD for certain types of overtime, and our analysis
disclosed that the required preauthorization was generally not obtained. BPD’s
Manual requires that departmental discretionary (voluntary) and secondary
36

--- Page 39 ---
employment (virtually always voluntary) overtime be preauthorized in Workday
by the officer’s immediate supervisor or a supervisor in the officer’s chain of
command before the overtime hours are worked. Other requirements exist for
emergency circumstances and non-discretionary (involuntary) overtime that allow
for authorization after the overtime has been worked.
Our analysis of 156,175 requests14 made between January 1, 2021 and June 30,
2022 for overtime requiring preauthorization, identified 110,704 requests (71
percent) that were approved after
Figure 14
the end of the officer’s shift, and
Summary of Overtime
11,693 requests (7 percent) that
Request Approvals
were approved during the shift
January 1, 2021 to June 30, 2022
being worked. These requests for
overtime were not preauthorized
in Workday as required (Figure 22%
14). Of these 122,397 delayed
7%
request approvals, the majority
71%
(82 percent) were caused by the
officer not submitting the
overtime request timely.
According to BPD management, Approved after the end of the shift
it is common practice for Approved during the shift
supervisory personnel to
Approved prior to the shift starting
preauthorize overtime verbally
Source: Workday overtime reports
when they do not readily have
access to Workday. However,
this practice is not consistent with BPD requirements and is not auditable (for
compliance with BPD policy) since these verbalized pre-approvals are not
subsequently noted or supported in Workday.
In August 2021, BPD took certain steps to monitor the timeliness of overtime
authorizations. However, BPD identified certain reporting limitations in
Workday, limiting the usefulness of this action, and BPD has not pursued further
action to develop procedures to monitor overtime preauthorization, such as
utilizing a combination of multiple reports from Workday or reviewing the
preauthorization of overtime requests on a test basis.
14 These requests were for at least one hour of overtime and included departmental discretionary
overtime (voluntary), secondary employment (virtually always voluntary), and uncategorized
overtime, which we are including as voluntary overtime absent a record of the type of overtime.
The requests resulted in approximately 760,000 hours of overtime totaling $48.8 million.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BPD
a. establish procedures to monitor the preauthorization of overtime, such as
developing a comprehensive report to identify instances of untimely
preauthorization or using available data on a test basis; and
b. establish and take appropriate corrective action for officers and the
related supervisors that routinely do not comply with preauthorization
requirements.
Finding 6
BPD did not have sufficient procedures for identifying, preventing, and
correcting uncategorized overtime, including approximately $16.7 million in
overtime paid between January 2021 and June 2022.
Analysis
BPD did not have sufficient procedures for identifying, preventing, and correcting
uncategorized overtime. BPD’s Manual requires employees to categorize
departmental overtime into one of 22 activity codes when recording time worked.
Properly categorizing overtime is essential if management is to monitor
compliance with related Manual and Policy requirements and for proper
recordkeeping and accounting for overtime activity. We noted that categorization
of overtime is a common practice at certain other police departments we
examined, and ensuring that overtime is properly categorized when recorded, in
accordance with agency procedures, is a best practice according to the IACP.
While evaluating procedures at five BPD districts and one unit, we noted two
common causes for overtime not being categorized as required: confusion by
officers over which activity code should be used and supervisory personnel
having difficulty navigating Workday to identify overtime that had not been
categorized. As depicted in Figure 15 on the following page, BPD has made
significant improvement ensuring that overtime activity is categorized. However,
approximately $16.7 million of $57.3 million in overtime paid between January
2021 and June 2022 was still not categorized as required. For example, in June
2022, approximately $290,000 in overtime was not categorized accounting for
eight percent of total overtime paid during that month.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Figure 15
Categorized and Uncategorized Overtime Payments
January 2021 to June 2022
Uncategorized Overtime Payments Categorized Overtime Payments
$4,000,000
$3,000,000
$2,000,000
$1,000,000
$0
Source: Workday overtime reports
BPD management advised that initial non-compliance was primarily attributable
to the implementation of Workday in December 2020 and to the fact that
categorizing overtime was a new process and Policy requirement. Since the
inception of Workday, BPD implemented procedures during its payroll process to
identify and resolve instances where overtime was not categorized and to bring
more awareness to employees of this requirement. However, as noted above BPD
is still recording uncategorized overtime and has not resolved the uncategorized
overtime recorded prior to the change.
Finally, BPD management advised that it had considered imposing a blocking
action in Workday that would have eliminated the ability of recording
uncategorized overtime (which is not permitted by BPD’s policies). However,
BPD believed such a strict action would have resulted in further unanticipated
consequences and chose to implement an aggressive post review process instead.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BPD
a. enhance procedures for identifying, preventing, and correcting
uncategorized overtime, such as by implementing automated alerts and
restrictions in Workday and providing additional training to employees;
and
39

--- Page 42 ---
b. consider the cost benefits of investigating the aforementioned $16.7
million in overtime paid between January 2021 and June 2022 that was
not categorized as required.
Secondary Employment
Finding 7
BPD’s policy on secondary employment overtime did not address certain
IACP best practices, and certain policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive.
Analysis
BPD’s policy on secondary employment overtime did not address several IACP
best practices, and certain policies were not sufficiently comprehensive. Our
comparison of BPD’s Secondary Employment Policy (SEP) and related
procedures to IACP best practices on secondary employment overtime disclosed
that many IACP best practices had been addressed by BPD policy (although they
may not have been effectively implemented as noted in other findings). However,
BPD’s policy and procedures did not adequately address the following best
practices meant to help provide for additional oversight and transparency
regarding key requirements and restrictions over secondary employment.
 Encourage situational awareness of off-duty officer locations among on-duty
supervisors when officers are engaged in off-duty employment15 (awareness
of off-duty employment is important for the safety of officers who are
working in a security capacity and may be more likely to be involved in an
incident that is being responded to by on-duty officers);
 Schedule extra-duty employment in a manner that ensures fair and equitable
selection of officers for assignments;
 Require allegations of misconduct during off-duty employment to be reported
to the primary employer (in this case BPD); and
 Impose restrictions on soliciting, requesting, suggesting, or recruiting any
business owner for the purposes of hiring officers for extra-duty employment.
In addition, certain provisions of the SEP were not sufficiently clear or detailed.
For example, the SEP did not require that documentation of required approval for
external non-uniformed secondary employment be submitted to the Secondary
Employment Unit (SEU) for recordation, thereby restricting BPD’s ability to
15 The terms “off-duty employment” and “extra-duty employment” are used in IACP publications,
but would include secondary employment as referenced in this report.
40

--- Page 43 ---
monitor this requirement.16 In this regard, we also noted a lack of specificity in
the SEP relating to required annual audits of officers’ secondary employment
eligibility by the SEU, such as what records and sources should be examined,
required audit documentation, and required follow-up and corrective action.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BPD
a. modify its SEP to address the IACP best practices, including the four
identified in this finding; and
b. ensure that the SEP clearly, and in sufficient detail, specifies
management’s intended policies and procedures for secondary
employment.
Finding 8 (Policy Issue)
BPD did not have approved overtime policies for its wide-load escorts
program and consequently could not assess the impact of this work on officer
performance and whether it contributed to officer fatigue.
Analysis
BPD did not have approved overtime policies for its wide-load escorts17 program
nor did BPD track actual time spent on wide-load escorts. Consequently, BPD
could not assess the impact of this work on officer performance and whether it
contributed to officer fatigue.
According to BPD records, BPD paid 31 officers approximately $684,000 (funded
by third parties) in secondary employment overtime for working wide-load escort
duty between January 2021 and June 2022, including six officers paid more than
$50,000 (See Figure 16 on the following page). In addition, two of the six
officers with the most material overtime were assigned to units other than Traffic
and Special Events, which is not prohibited, but in our opinion supports the need
for better analysis of who is performing wide-load escorts and the potential
impact on their regularly assigned duties.
BPD’s wide-load escort duty overtime practices provide that officers are paid for
at least three hours of overtime for each wide-load escort performed, regardless of
the actual time worked. We noted that certain officers often worked multiple
escorts on the same day, receiving at least three hours of overtime for each escort.
For example, our analysis of the aforementioned six officers (See Figure 16 on the
following page) disclosed that the two highest paid officers were paid for 3 or 4
16 Recordkeeping concerns relating to secondary employment are further addressed in Finding 10.
17 Overtime incurred to escort over-sized vehicles and shipments through City streets.
41

--- Page 44 ---
escorts (a minimum of 9 or 12 hours of overtime) on the same day a combined 55
times. Because officers were not required to record their actual time worked for
escorts conducted, we could not determine the actual time worked by these
officers for comparison to the overtime hours paid.
Figure 16
Six Officers Paid More than $50,000 in Wide-Load Escort Overtime From
January 2021 to June 2022
Wide-Load Escort Number of Hourly Minimums
Primary Assigned
Employee Overtime Received on the Same Day
Unit
Hours Payments 1 2 3 4 Total
Officer 1 SWAT 1,048 $81,690 89 82 26 5 202
Officer 2 Traffic & Special Events 1,026 78,842 114 80 19 5 218
Officer 3 Traffic & Special Events 914 72,273 63 114 5 0 182
Officer 4 Mobile Metro 616 62,605 87 38 11 2 138
Officer 5 Traffic & Special Events 657 55,820 113 50 4 0 167
Officer 6 Traffic & Special Events 854 55,533 103 62 15 3 183
Total 5,115 $406,763 569 426 80 15 1,090
Source: Workday overtime reports
While the use of hourly minimums for certain police activities is a common
practice in police departments, overuse of this type of overtime could contribute
to officer fatigue and should require strict policy requirements and monitoring.
BPD management was unaware of and did not approve the aforementioned
practices that have been in effect since at least 2011, plus had never conducted
any analyses of escort overtime.
Subsequent to our inquiries, the BPD Police Commissioner issued a directive,
effective January 1, 2023, significantly altering current practice. This new
directive authorized an officer to be paid overtime for a minimum of two hours
for the first wide-load escort performed in each 24-hour period (or for actual
hours worked, if greater). If additional wide-load escorts were performed during
the same 24-hour period, the officer would be paid overtime for the actual hours
worked with no guaranteed minimum. In addition, the directive mandated that, in
all cases, actual time worked be recorded by the officer.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BPD
a. incorporate the aforementioned Police Commissioner’s directive on wide-
load escorts into a formal policy and procedure, and
42

--- Page 45 ---
b. establish procedures and controls to periodically analyze and evaluate
overtime paid for wide-load escorts to ensure that overtime worked and
paid complies with the Police Commissioner’s directive.
Finding 9
BPD did not always maintain current executed agreements with third-party
entities employing officers for internal secondary employment.
Analysis
BPD did not always maintain current executed agreements with third-party
entities employing officers for internal secondary employment.18 According to
BPD management, as of June 2022, BPD made off-duty officers available to 28
private, State, and City sponsored locations or activities (see Exhibit 5). Our
review disclosed that BPD could not provide current written agreements for 7 of
the 17 locations or activities tested. Specifically, BPD could not locate a current
executed agreement for 5 of the items tested and could only provide agreements
that had expired in 2016 and 2018 for 2 others.
For example, BPD could not provide a current agreement with the Maryland
Stadium Authority to provide security at Baltimore Orioles and Baltimore Ravens
home games, and according to overtime records where such secondary
employment was specified, officers received approximately $748,000 and worked
approximately 11,600 hours in fiscal year 2022. Furthermore, five of the
agreements that were on file were not signed and/or omitted critical information,
such as the effective date; therefore, we considered them to have not been
executed.
Agreements with sponsor entities are important to establish critical provisions
pertaining to the services being provided, financial arrangements, authority and
liability, and term. According to City payroll records, BPD officers were paid
approximately $5.8 million in fiscal year 2022 for internal secondary
employment.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BPD maintain current and fully executed agreements
with entities employing officers for internal secondary employment.
18 BPD initially pays for internal secondary employment and is subsequently reimbursed by the
third party for these payments; however, a Baltimore City Department of Audits report covering
fiscal years 2018 and 2019 activity disclosed control deficiencies over secondary employment
reimbursement procedures.
43

--- Page 46 ---
Finding 10
BPD performed virtually no monitoring of external secondary employment
and did not maintain a complete record of officers and entities approved for
external secondary employment.
Analysis
BPD performed virtually no monitoring of external secondary employment and
did not maintain a complete record of officers and entities approved for external
secondary employment. The SEP requires that BPD conduct monitoring of
external secondary employment through annual audits of employee eligibility,
background investigations of entities employing the officers, and annual site visits
of those entities after entering into formal agreements allowing officers to work
external secondary employment.
Our review disclosed these audits, investigations, and site visits were not
performed as required. Authorization and monitoring of employee and entity
eligibility for external secondary employment is needed due to restrictions
outlined in the SEP to ensure organizational integrity and public trust. According
to the SEP,
Secondary employment shall not constitute a threat to the status or
dignity of law enforcement as a professional occupation.
Employment shall not present a potential for conflict of interest, or
the appearance of a conflict of interest, between a member’s duties
as a law enforcement officer and duties for the secondary employer.
We further noted that BPD’s database used to record external secondary
employment information was not complete or reliable which prevented BPD from
implementing effective monitoring procedures. For example, the database did not
include a complete record of entities authorized by BPD for its officers to work
external secondary employment.
According to BPD management, the missing information was due in part to the
fact that an officer’s request for working external secondary employment had to
be approved at several different levels of BPD Command, and documentation of
those approvals was not always returned to SEU for recordation. However, we
found that the database was not always updated when approved forms were
returned to SEU.
44

--- Page 47 ---
As a result of these recordkeeping deficiencies, BPD could not readily determine
the actual number of officers and entities authorized for external secondary
employment.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BPD implement effective monitoring procedures over
external secondary employment as required in the SEP. Specifically, we
recommend that BPD
a. conduct annual audits of employee eligibility for external secondary
employment,
b. conduct background investigations and annual site visits of entities at
which officers work external secondary employment, and
c. maintain a complete and accurate record of officers and entities approved
for external secondary employment.
45

--- Page 48 ---
Exhibit 1
Steps and Tests Performed to Evaluate BPD’s
Procedures and Controls for Overtime (page 1 of 2)
To accomplish our objective to determine whether overtime was subject to
adequate controls and used in accordance with BPD policies, we performed the
following:
 Interviewed key BPD personnel to help us determine and evaluate processes
for the administration, management, and control of overtime (departmental
and secondary employment), scheduling, and other related human resource
activities. Specifically, we interviewed key personnel within the
Administrative and Compliance Bureaus responsible for processing, tracking,
reporting, and auditing payroll and overtime activity. We also interviewed
front-line supervisors, as well as administrative/fiscal and command personnel
at six districts/units with material overtime activity to evaluate how overtime
is controlled, and how key policy requirements and restrictions are adhered to
at the district/unit level.
 Obtained an understanding of payroll and timekeeping procedures,
functionality and online controls within Workday, training, and other payroll
and human resource activities that impact overtime.
 Analyzed overtime payment and request data from Workday between
December 20, 2020 and June 30, 2022 to evaluate compliance with the
following requirements:
o Timeliness of overtime requests and approvals,
o Categorizing overtime worked in Workday, and
o Use of the comment field to record required information pertaining to
overtime being requested and worked.
 Tested hourly limit inspections performed by BPD and analyzed overtime
payment data from Workday for fiscal year 2022 to evaluate the sufficiency of
the inspections performed and compliance with the 32-hour weekly limit for
discretionary (voluntary) and secondary employment overtime.
 Analyzed and tested overtime activity for the 10 officers with the most
overtime hours worked in fiscal year 2022 to identify unusual trends,
questionable activity, and evaluate compliance with certain overtime related
requirements.
46

--- Page 49 ---
Exhibit 1
Steps and Tests Performed to Evaluate BPD’s
Procedures and Controls for Overtime (page 2 of 2)
 Tested 100 overtime payments to evaluate whether the overtime and time
entry were approved by the employee’s immediate supervisor or a supervisor
in their chain of command, as required.
 Tested leave usage for the period between January 1, 2021 and June 30, 2022
for 20 officers with material overtime worked to determine whether overtime
was improperly earned while the officer was on leave.
 Tested 25 overtime payments to ensure overtime rates were computed
accurately by Workday.
 Tested users with critical user access to Workday and Human Capital
Resource System (the system used to create and approve work schedules) to
ensure access was necessary and appropriate.
In addition, for secondary employment, we performed the following:
 Obtained and evaluated the completeness and reliability of BPD’s internal
database and shared drive used to maintain critical secondary employment
information and supporting documentation such as agreements with entities
and employee authorization forms.
 Tested 17 agreements between BPD and entities for internal secondary
employment activity to evaluate the sufficiency of agreements.
 Tested 25 secondary employment eligibility forms to ensure forms were
properly approved annually, as required.
 Tested 16 wide-load escorts to evaluate whether secondary employment
activity was authorized, worked, and adequately supported.
 Analyzed overtime payment data for the period between December 20, 2020
and June 30, 2022 to identify instances where multiple hourly minimums were
paid for wide-load escorts on the same day.
47

--- Page 50 ---
Exhibit 2
Summary of Overtime by Activity Code – Discretionary (Voluntary)
December 20, 2020 to June 30, 2022
Percent
Activity Payments
Description of Overtime Activity Hours of Total
Code (in dollars)
Overtime
This Activity is for officers who freely work shifts when
there are not enough officers for adequate and efficient
Staff Shortages 172,316 $ 9,719,972 16.8%
post coverage. This includes training outside of normal
hours.
This Activity is to be used when additional examination
Investigation 113,281 7,350,152 12.7%
or research is required in order to complete cases.
This Activity should be used for short-term operations
Crime
related to preventing crime and/or securing communities 46,428 2,809,977 4.8%
Suppression
(normally targeted to a specific district).
This Activity should be used for any work related to
Administrative
supporting or completing paperwork or administrative 37,168 2,096,446 3.6%
(Pre/Post-Shift)
duties outside of normal shift hours.
Building This Activity should be used for vacant posts for securing
17,009 1,128,949 1.9%
Security certain municipal buildings.
This Activity is to be used when listening to Jail Calls
outside of normal shift. When using this code, you are
Jail Calls 4,980 352,346 0.6%
required to include the Jail Call Tracking Number in the
Comment section.
Command This Activity requires approval of Lieutenant Colonel and
2,528 166,406 0.3%
Crime Initiative above and is for special, short or long-term objectives.
This Activity is to be used for transcriptions to include
Transcription creating transcriptions of interview tapes to written 3,397 156,996 0.3%
record.
Honor Guard This Activity is to be used for Honor Guard related events
230 15,579 0.0%
Ceremonies only, to include funeral and special ceremonies.
Activity requires the Fiscal Section’s pre-approval for
Special Project use. In general, it is to be used for projects that have to
Fiscal meet a specified deadline that involve subject matter 198 10,810 0.0%
Authorized expertise (such as project implementation, auditing,
special investigations).
Discretionary (Voluntary) Totals 397,535 $23,807,534 41.1%
48

--- Page 51 ---
Exhibit 2 (continued)
Summary of Overtime by Activity Code – Non-Discretionary (Involuntary)
December 20, 2020 to June 30, 2022
Percent
Activity Payments
Description of Overtime Activity Hours of Total
Code (in dollars)
Overtime
This Activity is to be used for an immediate time-
sensitive need where an investigative function needs to
occur outside of normal shift hours to include time critical
Investigation 74,621 $ 4,656,572 8.0%
activities related to on-call status. Examples would
include suspect captured, witness located, and other
related situations.
This Activity is to be used only for Non-Patrol
Non-Patrol
Assignments. For example, a post has to be filled but not
Staffing 79,579 4,246,381 7.3%
through drafting or a post being filled because there are
Shortages
not enough officers.
This Activity is to be used for Emergency situations that
Administrative require administrative functions to be fulfilled. Examples
48,963 2,760,937 4.8%
(Post-shift) would include use of force and auto accident
investigations.
This Activity is to be used for Patrol only related to the
Drafting Patrol
patrol constant. It is to be used in drafting when there are
Staffing 34,062 1,921,840 3.3%
not enough officers for adequate and efficient post
Shortages
coverage.
This Activity is to be used for arrests that extend outside
Arrest 17,554 997,166 1.7%
of normal shifts.
Commissioner This Activity is to be used for the five cancelled leave
10,309 619,909 1.1%
Days days as selected by the Police Commissioner annually.
This Activity is to be used for major disturbances of the
Protest 6,357 383,236 0.7%
peace as directed by Management.
This Activity is to be used for Special Events such as
Special Events 5,801 366,541 0.6%
parades, festivals, and community events.
This Activity is to be used only for executive functions
State’s Attorney related to the State Attorney’s office to include security of 5,134 349,789 0.6%
residence and personal protection.
This Activity is for emergency use only as declared by
Building
Asset Management or for hospital security for an injured 4,859 307,692 0.5%
Security
officer.
Holiday This Activity is to be used for details for holidays that are
998 52,718 0.1%
Deployment not one of the Commissioner Days.
This Activity is for Mayor, Governor, and Presidential
Elections 160 10,327 0.0%
details surrounding voting events.
Non-Discretionary (Involuntary) Totals 288,397 $16,673,108 28.8%
Source: Workday payroll reports
49

--- Page 52 ---
Exhibit 3
Key Requirements from BPD’s
Manual for Payroll Processes and Overtime Policy
Item Requirement Manual Policy
General
1 All days and hours of paid leave shall be treated as days and hours worked. X
BPD shall not rearrange an employee’s scheduled tour of duty hours to avoid payment
2 X
of overtime.
Restrictions and Officer Responsibilities
No employee shall work in excess of 75 hours per week, including regular time worked,
3 X
all overtime, and internal secondary employment.
No employee shall work in excess of 32 cumulative hours of discretionary (voluntary)
4 X
overtime and/or internal secondary employment in a week.
Officers who are on vacation or absent with permission shall not be authorized daily
5 X
overtime during their regularly scheduled shift.
6 Officers cannot work overtime within 24 hours of taking sick leave. X
Overtime requests in Workday shall include in the comment field the number of hours
7 being requested, description of work to be performed, supervising officer, and location X
of the overtime being worked.
8 Officers are required to enter the cost center and activity codes for overtime worked. X
9 Employees found to be in violation of the Manual may be subject to disciplinary action. X
Supervisory Approval, Monitoring, and Oversight
All discretionary (voluntary) overtime and internal secondary employment must be
10 X X
preapproved in Workday before hours are worked.
Pre-approval is granted by the officer’s immediate supervisor or a supervisor in the
11 X X
officer’s chain of command.
12 Supervisory personnel shall review all overtime requests in Workday daily. X X
Supervisors should monitor overtime reports in Workday for compliance with Manual
13 X
directives.
Supervisors shall ensure overtime duties are only used as necessity dictates, will review
14 overtime requests for accuracy, and will request supporting documentation to X
justify/verify time worked.
Commanders must monitor the health and wellness of subordinates by monitoring
15 X
overtime requests and ensuring compliance with the Manual directives.
Commanders shall monitor and restrict overtime to an absolute minimum and ensure
16 X
overtime is stringently controlled.
Commanders shall ensure overtime is not abused and monitor overtime through
17 X
monthly Workday reports.
Fiscal Services shall monitor Workday overtime reports and communicate any areas of
18 X
concern to unit commanders.
19 Overtime audits will be conducted. X X
Source: BPD’s Manual for Payroll Processes and Overtime Policy
50

--- Page 53 ---
Exhibit 4
Officers That Worked More Than 1,000 Hours of Overtime
Fiscal Year 2022
Annual
Avg. Departmental
Total Base Overtime Departmental
Hours of OT Hrs Non- Secondary
Rank Unit Overtime Salary as Percent of Discretionary Uncategorized
Overtime per Discretionary Employment
Payments19 of Base Salary (Voluntary)
Week (Involuntary)
7/1/2022
1 Sergeant SWAT 1,938 37.3 $151,373 $114,236 132.5% $21,348 $13,612 $90,698 $25,715
2 Officer Homicide 1,743 33.5 116,898 96,783 120.8% 44,136 62,891 6,466 3,406
3 Sergeant Patrol 1,578 30.4 124,311 113,178 109.8% 10,774 107,127 869 5,540
Traffic and
4 Sergeant 1,577 30.3 121,958 110,005 110.9% 8,188 - 68,232 45,538
Special Events
5 Officer Patrol 1,481 28.5 89,556 82,442 108.6% 6,967 76,692 - 5,897
6 Officer Patrol 1,464 28.1 88,266 88,321 99.9% 961 81,949 - 5,356
7 Officer Patrol 1,445 27.8 83,892 82,442 101.8% 1,843 77,741 - 4,309
8 Officer Patrol 1,433 27.6 94,712 95,725 98.9% 1,366 57,381 - 35,966
9 Officer Patrol 1,423 27.4 73,707 75,183 98.0% 10,197 59,043 - 4,467
10 Officer Major Case 1,422 27.3 80,946 79,849 101.4% 1,995 65,686 2,330 10,934
Emergency Dispatcher
11 1,421 27.3 60,949 58,643 103.9% 60,667 - - 283
Dispatcher Operations
Auto Theft
12 Sergeant 1,411 27.1 111,112 113,178 98.2% 31,591 78,171 - 1,349
Task Force
13 Officer Patrol 1,398 26.9 79,958 81,405 98.2% 79,241 717 - -
14 Sergeant Patrol 1,377 26.5 92,225 93,330 98.8% 32,812 4,001 9,474 45,938
15 Officer Homicide 1,376 26.5 92,087 96,783 95.1% 18,622 69,022 - 4,443
16 Officer Homicide 1,373 26.4 83,494 88,321 94.5% 30,316 50,086 - 3,091
17 Sergeant Patrol 1,361 26.2 95,859 99,428 96.4% 37,852 50,385 1,742 5,880
18 Officer CitiWatch 1,353 26.0 95,579 99,956 95.6% 42,529 8,211 27,370 17,468
19 Officer Detective Unit 1,350 26.0 64,711 71,553 90.4% 6,955 56,957 - 799
20 Officer Patrol 1,348 25.9 81,911 88,321 92.7% 12,167 69,740 - 4
19 Total overtime payments may not foot to the sum of amounts for each overtime category due to rounding.
51

--- Page 54 ---
Exhibit 4
Officers That Worked More Than 1,000 Hours of Overtime
Fiscal Year 2022
Annual
Avg. Departmental
Total Base Overtime Departmental
Hours of OT Hrs Non- Secondary
Rank Unit Overtime Salary as Percent of Discretionary Uncategorized
Overtime per Discretionary Employment
Payments19 of Base Salary (Voluntary)
Week (Involuntary)
7/1/2022
Command
21 Sergeant 1,336 25.7 107,470 113,178 95.0% 4,468 83,681 7,777 11,544
Admin. Support
Mobile Metro
22 Officer 1,322 25.4 91,676 99,956 91.7% 11,714 63,477 - 16,486
Unit
23 Officer Admin. Staff 1,315 25.3 77,470 85,148 91.0% 16,310 49,592 2,877 8,691
24 Emergency Dispatcher 1,313 25.2 55,084 58,643 93.9% 53,474 - - 1,611
Dispatcher Operations
25 Officer Homicide 1,291 24.8 86,575 95,725 90.4% 10,950 55,573 - 20,053
26 Officer Criminal 1,282 24.7 88,262 99,956 88.3% 52,712 17,515 7,310 10,725
Intelligence
27 Officer Training Unit 1,266 24.3 86,246 97,841 88.1% 1,150 77,991 3,940 3,165
28 Lieutenant Executive 1,256 24.1 100,845 119,525 84.4% 1,756 18,738 70,035 10,316
Officer
29 Officer SWAT 1,249 24.0 62,059 71,553 86.7% 5,010 31,331 16,212 9,505
30 Officer Patrol 1,241 23.9 85,458 99,956 85.5% 6,754 58,925 1,154 18,626
31 Sergeant Patrol 1,234 23.7 91,365 105,774 86.4% 61,882 16,806 - 12,677
32 Officer Detective Unit 1,223 23.5 81,268 95,725 84.9% 23,992 22,389 24,393 10,495
33 Officer Executive 1,222 23.5 82,059 96,783 84.8% 11,290 53,955 5,174 11,641
Protection
34 Officer Patrol 1,221 23.5 69,413 79,849 86.9% 4,945 4,197 52,748 7,523
35 Sergeant Investigations 1,221 23.5 83,876 104,716 80.1% 22,055 33,923 27,734 164
36 Sergeant Patrol 1,204 23.2 73,553 101,543 72.4% 3,117 54,734 10,694 5,009
37 Officer Homicide 1,203 23.1 76,594 90,437 84.7% 22,991 46,726 1,461 5,417
38 Officer Booking 1,203 23.1 60,842 71,553 85.0% 8,009 39,603 386 12,843
39 Sergeant Patrol 1,203 23.1 97,486 113,178 86.1% 3,034 86,780 - 7,672
40 Officer Patrol 1,198 23.0 57,707 71,553 80.6% 5,709 43,752 - 8,247
52

--- Page 55 ---
Exhibit 4
Officers That Worked More Than 1,000 Hours of Overtime
Fiscal Year 2022
Annual
Avg. Departmental
Total Base Overtime Departmental
Hours of OT Hrs Non- Secondary
Rank Unit Overtime Salary as Percent of Discretionary Uncategorized
Overtime per Discretionary Employment
Payments19 of Base Salary (Voluntary)
Week (Involuntary)
7/1/2022
41 Officer Admin. Staff 1,196 23.0 80,092 96,783 82.8% 40,319 7,969 19,081 12,723
42 Officer Command 1,196 23.0 70,484 85,148 82.8% 40,503 18,310 3,720 7,950
Admin. Support
43 Sergeant Anti-Crime 1,196 23.0 94,436 113,178 83.4% 16,129 68,751 2,769 6,788
44 Officer Patrol 1,188 22.8 64,398 76,738 83.9% 43,142 14,685 - 6,571
45 Sergeant Traffic and 1,187 22.8 93,350 112,120 83.3% 13,745 1,717 47,552 30,336
Special Events
46 Sergeant Patrol 1,183 22.7 94,462 114,236 82.7% 51,357 12,144 15,987 14,974
47 Sergeant Communication 1,183 22.7 87,444 114,236 76.5% 16,675 - 54,585 16,183
s
48 Officer Patrol 1,180 22.7 59,504 71,553 83.2% 18,097 8,202 2,344 30,861
49 Officer Evidence 1,179 22.7 80,042 98,899 80.9% 700 51,947 24,882 2,514
Control Section
50 Officer Patrol 1,172 22.5 58,934 71,553 82.4% 12,040 38,164 - 8,730
51 Officer Lexington 1,164 22.4 65,892 79,849 82.5% 19,822 20,380 729 24,962
Market Unit
52 Officer Detective Unit 1,151 22.1 65,337 78,294 83.5% 5,753 57,415 - 2,169
53 Officer Homicide 1,147 22.1 77,941 98,899 78.8% 40,500 31,351 - 6,090
54 Officer Auto Theft 1,140 21.9 75,785 95,725 79.2% 5,772 67,250 - 2,763
Task Force
55 Officer Patrol 1,137 21.9 68,085 87,264 78.0% 3,810 44,264 - 20,010
56 Emergency Dispatcher 1,117 21.5 47,000 57,776 81.3% 47,739 - - (739)
Dispatcher Operations
57 Officer Special 1,115 21.4 74,233 93,610 79.3% 7,409 13,645 44,345 8,834
Investigations
58 Officer Neighborhood 1,114 21.4 60,314 76,738 78.6% 10,212 29,823 3,810 16,468
Coordination
59 Sergeant Patrol 1,112 21.4 74,332 103,659 71.7% 9,118 30,719 24,485 10,010
60 Sergeant Child Abuse 1,111 21.4 78,412 103,659 75.6% 13,317 50,991 3,570 10,534
Unit
53

--- Page 56 ---
Exhibit 4
Officers That Worked More Than 1,000 Hours of Overtime
Fiscal Year 2022
Annual
Avg. Departmental
Total Base Overtime Departmental
Hours of OT Hrs Non- Secondary
Rank Unit Overtime Salary as Percent of Discretionary Uncategorized
Overtime per Discretionary Employment
Payments19 of Base Salary (Voluntary)
Week (Involuntary)
7/1/2022
61 Officer Patrol 1,111 21.4 73,161 94,668 77.3% 2,819 65,480 - 4,862
62 Officer Homicide 1,110 21.4 76,311 99,956 76.3% 33,429 42,567 - 316
63 Sergeant Admin. Support 1,109 21.3 85,221 111,063 76.7% 52,741 17,884 5,392 9,204
64 Officer Executive 1,104 21.2 72,680 94,668 76.8% 20,023 39,798 - 12,859
Protection
65 Sergeant Homicide 1,101 21.2 83,539 108,947 76.7% 27,510 50,937 - 5,092
66 Officer Homicide 1,099 21.1 67,030 86,206 77.8% 8,235 42,362 631 15,802
67 Report Central Records 1,098 21.1 34,302 42,273 81.1% 14,788 19,773 - (259)
Reviewer
68 Sergeant Patrol 1,091 21.0 87,668 114,236 76.7% 6,216 64,880 7,468 9,104
69 Officer Auto Theft 1,091 21.0 67,033 86,206 77.8% 2,050 63,309 - 1,674
Task Force
70 Sergeant Patrol 1,090 21.0 87,104 114,236 76.2% 9,150 72,407 - 5,547
71 Officer Patrol 1,089 20.9 65,608 87,264 75.2% 626 63,837 - 1,146
72 Emergency Dispatcher 1,088 20.9 45,801 57,776 79.3% 44,637 - - 1,165
Dispatcher Operations
73 Officer Patrol 1,087 20.9 52,776 71,553 73.8% 7,623 39,045 - 6,108
74 Officer Patrol 1,077 20.7 42,940 61,183 70.2% 32,020 10,530 - 390
75 Officer Homicide 1,074 20.6 73,928 99,956 74.0% 20,930 44,692 - 8,306
76 Officer Patrol 1,071 20.6 65,831 89,379 73.7% 41,644 22,020 - 2,167
77 Officer Evidence 1,062 20.4 73,151 99,956 73.2% 5,898 13,281 32,599 21,374
Control Section
78 Officer Applicant 1,060 20.4 69,112 93,610 73.8% 1,519 61,956 908 4,729
Investigations
79 Officer Neighborhood 1,059 20.4 73,157 98,899 74.0% 3,344 1,852 58,830 9,132
Coordination
80 Sergeant Investigations 1,059 20.4 81,268 110,005 73.9% 67,121 5,124 - 9,024
54

--- Page 57 ---
Exhibit 4
Officers That Worked More Than 1,000 Hours of Overtime
Fiscal Year 2022
Annual
Avg. Departmental
Total Base Overtime Departmental
Hours of OT Hrs Non- Secondary
Rank Unit Overtime Salary as Percent of Discretionary Uncategorized
Overtime per Discretionary Employment
Payments19 of Base Salary (Voluntary)
Week (Involuntary)
7/1/2022
81 Officer Major Case 1,057 20.3 61,672 82,442 74.8% 2,083 25,123 19,378 15,087
82 Officer Neighborhood 1,051 20.2 68,672 93,610 73.4% 5,639 41,020 13,647 8,366
Coordination
83 Officer Building 1,046 20.1 62,855 87,264 72.0% 288 59,106 - 3,461
Security
84 Officer Patrol 1,045 20.1 71,965 99,956 72.0% 27,521 42,258 - 2,185
85 Officer Warrant 1,045 20.1 71,946 99,956 72.0% 11,326 30,106 25,598 4,916
Apprehension
Task Force
86 Officer Neighborhood 1,039 20.0 71,542 99,956 71.6% 39,590 15,798 12,566 3,589
Coordination
87 Officer Investigations 1,039 20.0 53,885 75,183 71.7% 270 39,208 1,830 12,577
88 Sergeant Homicide 1,038 20.0 72,014 95,882 75.1% 21,253 47,685 - 3,076
89 Officer Investigations 1,035 19.9 70,411 98,899 71.2% 6,262 - 46,083 18,066
90 Officer Traffic and 1,035 19.9 61,198 85,148 71.9% 21,246 999 28,597 10,357
Special Events
91 Officer Homicide 1,033 19.9 65,518 90,437 72.4% 62,721 1,257 - 1,541
92 Officer Investigations 1,033 19.9 62,744 88,321 71.0% 23,041 34,992 - 4,710
93 Sergeant Executive 1,033 19.9 82,075 114,236 71.8% 2,987 73,570 - 5,518
Officer
94 Officer Command 1,030 19.8 70,846 96,783 73.2% 19,513 33,997 14,458 2,878
Admin. Support
95 Lieutenant Executive 1,026 19.7 89,230 129,044 69.1% 30,507 19,282 26,299 13,141
Officer
96 Officer Patrol 1,023 19.7 46,548 66,887 69.6% 39,565 5,703 - 1,279
97 Officer Patrol 1,016 19.5 40,667 62,220 65.4% 32,638 144 - 7,885
98 Officer Command 1,016 19.5 69,947 99,956 70.0% 48,323 20,543 - 1,081
Admin. Support
99 Officer Patrol 1,015 19.5 54,850 76,738 71.5% 52,842 155 - 1,854
100 Officer Traffic and 1,009 19.4 65,699 93,610 70.2% 2,911 - 46,676 16,112
Special Events
Source: Workday payroll reports
55

--- Page 58 ---
Exhibit 5
List of BPD Internal Secondary Employment Sites
and Test Results
Agreement Status
Item Site/Location Sponsor/Entity Name
Based on Testing
Private Sponsors
1 100 E. Pratt Street T. Rowe Price No Agreement Provided
2 Horseshoe Casino Horseshoe Casino Agreement Not Executed
3 Johns Hopkins Emergency Room Johns Hopkins No Agreement Provided
4 Marriott Hotel Inner Harbor Marriott Agreement Not Executed
5 Marriott Hotel Waterfront Marriott Agreement Not Executed
6 New Psalmist Baptist Church New Psalmist Active
7 Power Plant Live Cordish Office Active
8 Shoppers Shoppers Food and Pharmacy Active
R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma University of Maryland
9 Active
Center Medical System
10 South Street ABB South St Assoc. Expired in Sept 2016
11 Kennedy Krieger Kennedy Krieger Expired in July 2018
State Sponsors
Oriole Park at Camden Yards
12 Maryland Stadium Authority No Agreement Provided
(Orioles)
13 M&T Bank Stadium (Ravens) Maryland Stadium Authority No Agreement Provided
Maryland Insurance
14 St. Paul Garage Agreement Not Executed
Administration
City Sponsors
15 Speed and Red Light Camera Review Baltimore City Active
16 Wide-Load Escorts Baltimore City Agreement Not Executed
17 Visitation Center Baltimore City No Agreement Provided
18 CFG Bank Arena Baltimore City Not Tested
19 Citywide Swimming Pools Baltimore City Not Tested
20 Baltimore Convention Center Baltimore City Not Tested
21 Health Clinic at Fayette Street Baltimore City Not Tested
22 Health Clinic at North Avenue Baltimore City Not Tested
23 9 Hour Impound Lot Baltimore City Not Tested
24 4 Hour Impound Lot Baltimore City Not Tested
25 Baltimore Municipal Building Baltimore City Not Tested
26 Pier 6 Pavilion Baltimore City Not Tested
27 Landfill at Quarantine Road Baltimore City Not Tested
28 Landfill at Reisterstown Road Baltimore City Not Tested
Source: Secondary Employment Unit Management
56

--- Page 59 ---
APPENDIX
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT
Brandon M. Scott Richard J. Worley, Jr.
Mayor Police Commissioner
January 10, 2024
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed please find responses from the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) to the performance audit report
evaluating BPD’s policies and procedures for overtime practices, activity of sworn officers, and certain related
human resource and payroll functions related to overtime from the Office of Legislative Audits for the period
beginning December 20, 2020, and ending June 30, 2022.
As noted, at the beginning of the audit period, the City of Baltimore and BPD implemented a new HR/Payroll
System called Workday. This was a substantial and challenging implementation that touched on every aspect of
HR and Payroll processes across the city. Because the prior payroll system allowed for poor oversight and a lack
of accountability, BPD took the initiative to configure Workday to provide more robust internal controls. The
implementation required a comprehensive overhaul of BPD’s administrative policies, practices, and procedures
relating to time entry, overtime, and leave. Timekeeping activities went from poorly managed paper-based
processes to digital time entry with employee self-service tools, requiring hourly non-exempt employees to enter
time in a “pay to punch” system.
BPD believes it is important to note that the audit was conducted right at the time of deployment and during the
stabilization period for the new HR/Payroll system. The agency continues to ensure our employees are compliant
with all payroll policies and procedures and has developed a plan to implement the audit recommendations.
If you have any additional questions or issues, please contact the BPD’s Chief Financial Officer, Ms. Shallah
Graham, at 443-602-4280 or Shallah.Graham@BaltimorePolice.org. Thank you for all of your hard work and
collaboration throughout this process.
Sincerely,
Richard J. Worley, Jr.
Commissioner
Baltimore Police Department
c/o 242 West 29th Street ⚫ Baltimore, Maryland 21211-2908

--- Page 60 ---
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
Finding 1
Baltimore City Police Department (BPD) supervisory personnel at all levels did not exercise the
necessary oversight and disciplinary action to effectively monitor overtime and to ensure compliance
with BPD’s policies and procedures.
We recommend that BPD establish effective oversight of overtime by supervisory personnel at all
levels. Specifically, we recommend that BPD
a. ensure that front‐line supervisory personnel verify that Manual and Policy requirements are met
before approving overtime,
b. establish procedures for Command personnel to effectively analyze overtime data at all levels to
ensure that front‐line supervisors are ensuring compliance with overtime requirements, and
c. take appropriate disciplinary action against those charging and approving improper overtime.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The audit was conducted during a time when the City had just
additional comments as implemented a new city-wide HR/Payroll System called Workday. This
deemed necessary.
new system went “live” on December 20, 2020, with the first paycheck
for BPD being processed in January 2021. This was a challenging
implementation that touched on every aspect of HR and Payroll
processes across the City. Because of the complexity of BPD’s
workforce (e.g., both sworn and professional staff, multiple union
representation, complicated supervisory organization structure, multiple
shift times, distributed personnel over several locations, frequent
movement of personnel to cover operational need), BPD required
additional configurations and more substantial and targeted training than
perhaps other agencies. BPD also had to revamp its policy and
employee guidance documents regarding time tracking, leave requests,
and overtime to bring them into alignment with the way the Workday
system processed data related to these activities and to ensure
compliance with established BPD policies and union contracts.
The payroll system in use prior to Workday had multiple inherent
weaknesses that allowed for employee abuse of time, leave tracking and
overtime documentation. As part of this response, BPD would like to
highlight that the audit found no weaknesses with the BPD requested
configuration of internal controls and policies within Workday. The

--- Page 61 ---
following highlights some of the major changes that BPD requested as
part of the Workday implementation (the go-live and stabilization
period of which coincided with the audit period):
1. BPD advocated diligently to ensure that the city would move
from paying hourly employees “to schedule” to paying hourly
employees “to punch,” meaning that hourly non-exempt
employees would be required to punch in at the beginning of
their work shift and punch out at the end of their work shift in
order to be paid for time worked.
2. The following methods of punching in/out were configured and
made available to employees: biometric time clocks, Workday
app on mobile phone (with geofencing enabled), computer,
kiosks with Workday application installed, and a manual time
entry form for when employees could not enter time via a digital
means. If an employee completes a manual time entry form,
their manager must enter their time in Workday.
3. BPD required that the Overtime pre-approval and Overtime Slip
(paper processes) be replaced by a digital Overtime Request
process and emphasized in policy that an employee’s manager
had to approve the Overtime Request in Workday prior to the
time being worked.
4. BPD requested that certain policy items be coded in the system
(where doable) to reduce the ability to circumvent policy
restrictions regarding time entry and overtime approval.
5. BPD reviewed and rewrote all payroll-related policies (creating
a BPD Manual for Payroll Processes) to ensure greater internal
controls, accountability and transparency.
6. Since the Workday implementation, BPD has requested
numerous reports and tools from the City (such as an Overtime
dashboard for managers) to create greater access to time tracking
and approval data.
7. At the time of the Workday deployment and for many months
afterwards, BPD developed training guides, job aids and tutorial
videos to assist BPD employees in complying with BPD time
tracking and payroll policies.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2024
Please provide details The BPD agrees that it is imperative that all employees follow
of corrective action or department-wide policies. Currently, all supervisors have electronically
explain disagreement. certified the acknowledgment of the payroll related polices through
BPD’s online document control platform. In addition, all non-sworn

--- Page 62 ---
supervisors have the option to go through sergeant training with a
Workday/ payroll component.
As a result of the finding, BPD will initiate the following:
1. Re-train supervisors on responsibilities for end-of-pay-period
close to include:
a. Reviewing end-of-pay-period close check list.
b. Using the Workday Overtime Dashboard (will also
update the training video to focus on finding policy
violations such as 32-hr overtime cap and no cost center/
activity code).
2. BPD will mandate that supervisors utilize 30 mins within
scheduled work hours at the end of every pay period to review
payroll policy compliance of their respective direct reports.
3. Offer monthly ongoing in-person training open to all
supervisors.
Mandate attendance to monthly training for repeat policy non-
compliance offenders identified via audits and command review.
The BPD Performance Standards Section (PSS), which is responsible
for Departmental audits and inspections, has experienced staffing
shortages, which limited the section’s ability to cover the required
workload. However, PSS will revise its financial auditing methodology
to most effectively address these audit findings. This quarterly audit
plan will have written methodology and include coverage of the
following topics:
1. Excessive earners
2. 32-hour rule
3. No activity code
4. Wide Load
5. External secondary employment
6. Pre-authorization
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2024
Please provide details The command staff currently have several tools to manage overtime to
of corrective action or include an Overtime Report Dashboard in Workday and the bi-weekly
explain disagreement. overtime reports.
1. BPD will enhance the bi-weekly overtime reports that are
completed at the end of the payroll close. Today they are
currently provided as Excel files. BPD had been planning on
converting them to a dashboard making it easier and more
dynamic for commanders to use.
a. BPD will work with the City to see if the Overtime
Dashboard (used while the pay period is open) can be
expanded to allow access to the administrative Sergeants

--- Page 63 ---
and Lieutenants to help the Command Staff oversee
compliance to the overtime policies.
b. Since the time period of the audit, Timekeepers currently
pull compliance reports and address as needed. However,
BPD will strengthen this process and utilize command to
help disseminate when corrective action is needed.
2. BPD will discuss non-compliance with individual commanders
at the weekly Comstat meeting.
a. Commanders will be expected to take corrective action
as needed to include Public Integrity referral if necessary.
3. In FY 2024, BPD’s Fiscal Unit initiated one-on-one Quarterly
Meetings with Commanders to review General Fund budgets
inclusive of Overtime budgets.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2024
Please provide details The OT Audit Plan to be developed by PSS will include a referral
of corrective action or process to Public Integrity and Command Staff will be expected to refer
explain disagreement. employees for non-compliance to Public Integrity.
Finding 2
BPD did not have procedures to analyze overtime activity to evaluate the necessity and propriety of
consistently high levels of overtime paid to certain officers. Our analysis disclosed 100 officers who
recorded more than 1,000 hours of overtime in fiscal year 2022, including 7 that earned more than
$100,000 in overtime.
We recommend that BPD
a. develop comprehensive procedures to routinely monitor overtime activity to identify employees
with potentially excessive overtime and take appropriate action to prevent excessive overtime
from being worked;
b. modify its Manual and Policy to require the specific overtime analysis and management best
practices established by IACP referenced in this finding; and
c. investigate the necessity and propriety of excessive overtime, including the 100 officers noted
above, and take disciplinary action against the employees and supervisors associated with any
overtime earned in violation of BPD’s policies, as deemed appropriate.
Agency Response
Analysis

--- Page 64 ---
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2024
Please provide details As of September 2022, BPD has reported on the Top 10 users of
of corrective action or overtime for both dollars and hours on the bi-weekly overtime reports.
explain disagreement. Although not required by this audit finding, BPD plans on enhancing
the reporting by:
1. Migrating the reporting to a new Overtime dashboard making it
easier for commanders to view and analyze.
2. Reporting the high earners of overtime at Comstat where
additional transparency and justification can be provided.
To supplement the data review, BPD’s Performance Standards Section
(PSS) will develop a quarterly sampling audit plan to include:
a) Excessive earners
b) 32-hour rule
c) No activity code
d) Wide Load
e) External secondary employment
f) Pre-authorization
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2023
Please provide details BPD’s current Manual and its Policy include provisions pertaining to
of corrective action or the responsibilities and monitoring efforts required from supervisory
explain disagreement. and command staff. However, BPD will clarify current policy language
as identified by the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP)
relating to analysis and management of overtime activity and the
recommendation that supervisory and command staff should monitor
individual and summary activity reports of overtime expenditures to
identify unusual, unexplained, or disproportionate expenditures in
overtime.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2023
Please provide details In order to efficiently and effectively address the policy violation
of corrective action or concerns on specific individuals identified within the BPD’s staffing
explain disagreement. constraints, PSS will cross reference the 100 employees that were the
highest earners of overtime with the 286 individuals identified in
violation of the 32-hour OT cap. PSS will conduct a deep dive review of
individuals identified on both lists to determine if any policy was
violated and a referral to PIB is required.
Additionally, recognizing that earning excessive overtime alone is not a
policy violation, but may be an indication of other unequitable processes
within the department, BPD will conduct an Equity analysis of the top

--- Page 65 ---
100 high earning employees. This analysis will help to determine if the
approved overtime was based on workload needs, if it was equitably
offered to other team members, and if any policy/process improvements
are needed going forward.
Finding 3
BPD did not conduct required reviews to ensure that officers were limited to no more than 32 hours
of voluntary overtime per week, and our analysis identified 268 individuals who exceeded the limit a
total of 693 times during fiscal year 2022.
We recommend that BPD
a. review and investigate reports of potential excessive overtime to determine if policy violations
have occurred,
b. ensure that the reviews include all applicable overtime types, and
c. investigate the aforementioned 268 individuals with excessive overtime and take appropriate
corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2023
Please provide details 1. BPD is implementing a replacement to the bi-weekly pay period
of corrective action or reports provided in Excel format with a BPD overtime
explain disagreement. dashboard. This will allow Command Staff to easily identify
their employees who have worked more than 32 hrs.
2. BPD’s Performance Standards Section (PSS) will develop a
quarterly sampling audit plan to include excessive earners and
those violating the 32-hour cap.
a. This will include a referral process to Public Integrity
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2024
Please provide details PSS will document the audit methodology in the audit plan for auditors
of corrective action or to ensure consistency of evaluating the voluntary 32-hrs and what hours
explain disagreement. result in the policy violation.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2024

--- Page 66 ---
Please provide details For efficiency purposes, PSS will take a targeted approach to address
of corrective action or the policy violation concerns on specific individuals identified. PSS will
explain disagreement. cross reference the 100 employees that were the highest earners of
overtime with the 286 individuals identified in violation of the 32 hour
OT cap. PSS will conduct a deep dive review of individuals identified
on both lists to determine if any policy was violated and a referral to
PIB is required.
Finding 4
BPD did not conduct quarterly audits of overtime activity as required by its Policy.
We recommend that BPD
a. develop procedures and processes for quarterly audits of overtime activity,
b. conduct quarterly audits of overtime activity as required, and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any noncompliant or unsupported overtime.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The BPD Performance Standards Section (PSS) has experienced staffing
additional comments as shortages, which limited the section’s ability to cover the required
deemed necessary. workload. To assist with this finding BPD is implementing the
following:
1. Currently hiring for additional new grant funded positions to
create a financial audit team to build out capacity.
2. Once staff are hired, the PSS Teams will amend the scope of
their audits to address higher risk items called out in the audit
and expand the sampling methodology.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/31/2024
Please provide details of PSS will revise its financial auditing methodology to address these audit
corrective action or findings. This quarterly audit plan will have written methodology and
explain disagreement. include coverage of the following topics:
1. Excessive earners
2. 32-hour rule
3. No activity code
4. Wide Load
5. External secondary employment
6. Pre-authorization

--- Page 67 ---
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/31/2024
Please provide details of Policy 1801 will be updated to require that PSS conducts quarterly
corrective action or overtime audits.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/31/2024
Please provide details of The Audit Plan to be developed by PSS will include a referral process to
corrective action or Public Integrity
explain disagreement.

--- Page 68 ---
Finding 5
BPD did not have procedures and controls to monitor preauthorization required for certain types of
overtime, and our analysis disclosed that the required preauthorization was generally not obtained.
We recommend that BPD
a. establish procedures to monitor the preauthorization of overtime, such as developing a
comprehensive report to identify instances of untimely preauthorization or using available data
on a test basis; and
b. establish and take appropriate corrective action for officers and the related supervisors that
routinely do not comply with preauthorization requirements.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details BPD had been working with City partners since Workday Go Live in
of corrective action or early 2021 to have a report developed for voluntary overtime worked
explain disagreement. before pre-approval was approved. In late 2022, BPD was informed that
Workday was not able to provide this report and had been working on
an alternative manual spot-checking approach.
Additionally, BPD has been working to be granted report writer access
in Workday – this will enable more sophisticated data pulls of the OT
data for BPD to directly analyze the authorization process.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2024
Please provide details PSS will incorporate the authorization process into their quarterly
of corrective action or auditing plan and will take applicable corrective action based on the
explain disagreement. severity of the findings:
1. Mandate attendance to monthly training for repeat policy non-
compliance offenders.
2. Refer to PIB if needed.

--- Page 69 ---
Finding 6
BPD did not have sufficient procedures for identifying, preventing, and correcting uncategorized
overtime, including approximately $16.7 million in overtime paid between January 2021 and June
2022.
We recommend that BPD
a. enhance procedures for identifying, preventing, and correcting uncategorized overtime, such as by
implementing automated alerts and restrictions in Workday and providing additional training to
employees; and
b. consider the cost benefits of investigating the aforementioned $16.7 million in overtime paid
between January 2021 and June 2022 that was not categorized as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/2023
Please provide details BPD had been working with City partners since Workday Go Live in
of corrective action or early 2021 to have a pay restriction when there is no cost center or
explain disagreement. activity code entered for the overtime. BPD had requested that the
overtime without a cost center or activity code does not get paid until
the officer adds the required data. There were three options presented:
1. Soft warning, where there is a warning to the employee entering
the time that there is no activity code entered for the overtime.
BPD requested this be implemented immediately and it was in
2021.
2. Hard stop, where no overtime or regular pay will be paid out
after the date that the overtime was not entered correctly (with
the missing cost center and activity code). BPD felt with the
staffing shortages and the value on retaining employees that this
would have a consequential negative impact on morale.
3. Medium stop, where the associated overtime will not be paid (no
cost center and activity code) but all other pay properly
submitted and approved would be paid. This was the path that
was being explored. However, in late 2022 BPD was informed
that this restriction was not available in Workday, and BPD had
been working on an alternative approach via auditing.
BPD will implement the following:

--- Page 70 ---
4. BPD is implementing a replacement to the bi-weekly pay period
reports provided in Excel format with a BPD overtime
dashboard. This will allow Command Staff to easily identify
their employees who have no cost center or activity code.
5. Since the audit, Timekeepers currently pull compliance reports
and address as needed. However, BPD will strengthen this
process and utilize command to help disseminate when
corrective action is needed.
6. BPD’s Performance Standards Section (PSS) will develop a
quarterly sampling audit plan with documented methodology to
include flagging applicable time entries with no cost center or
activity code.
Recommendation 6b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details BPD agrees that the Cost Center and Activity code must be entered per
of corrective action or Policy, and the compliance trend has been moving in a positive
explain disagreement. direction since the audit period.
The audit period concurred at the same time as the go live date to BPDs
first ERP system called Workday (January 2021 to June 2022) and there
were monumental changes to payroll processing for the employees. The
biggest change is that the time reporting moved to the employees, and
the employees became responsible for recording all time worked. As a
result of the facts that BPD employees were learning a new system, and
the age of the data BPD does not feel that auditing the data would be an
efficient use of resources. As to audit the data would be a enormous
task involving millions of transactions and thousands of employees.
BPD does not have the resources to support this historical lookback and
would like to dedicate resources to ensuring compliance going forward.
In addition, the timeframe for taking correcting action for misconduct
has ended.
Auditor’s Comment: Although the response indicates disagreement, BPD’s related
comments indicate that it has considered the costs and other resources that would be
necessary to investigate the $16.7 million in uncategorized overtime referenced in the
finding as recommended. At this time, the actual conclusion reached by BPD on whether
an investigation was warranted or practicable, is beyond the focus of the related
recommendation.

--- Page 71 ---
Secondary Employment
Finding 7
BPD’s policy on secondary employment overtime did not address certain IACP best practices, and
certain policies were not sufficiently comprehensive.
We recommend that BPD
a. modify its SEP to address the IACP best practices, including the four identified in this finding; and
b. ensure that the SEP clearly, and in sufficient detail, specifies management’s intended policies and
procedures for secondary employment.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Baltimore Police Department (BPD) has been working on
additional comments as transitioning the management of secondary employment to a third party
deemed necessary. at no cost to the City. This has been underway since the beginning of
this audit in 2021and BPD had self-identified that the program could be
more efficiently managed by a focused third party. A contract for the
management of third-party secondary employment is in place with a
vendor and the outsourcing transition is underway. When fully
outsourced the vendor will manage all uniformed third-party secondary
employment assignments. BPD will continue to manage any secondary
employment assignments for other city agencies, and these will be
processed through Workday.
For internal secondary employment, BPD has followed the IACP best
practice of requiring allegations of misconduct during off-duty
employment to be reported to BPD. In addition, BPD has imposed
restrictions on soliciting, requesting, suggesting, or recruiting any
business owner for the purposes of hiring officers for extra-duty
employment.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/24
Please provide details BPD has pro-actively been addressing these matters. The third party
of corrective action or under contract to manage BPD secondary employment will be ensuring
explain disagreement. that all IACP best practices are implemented. In addition, all uniformed
third-party secondary employment will go through the vendor
(previously internal vs external).
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/24
Please provide details BPD has pro-actively been addressing these matters and has contracted
of corrective action or with a third party vendor to manage all off-duty work. Using a third
explain disagreement. party will contribute to treating all uniformed secondary employment
the same.

--- Page 72 ---
Finding 8 (Policy Issue)
BPD did not have approved overtime policies for its wide‐load escorts program and consequently
could not assess the impact of this work on officer performance and whether it contributed to officer
fatigue.
We recommend that BPD
a. incorporate the aforementioned Police Commissioner’s directive on wide‐load escorts into a
formal policy and procedure, and
b. establish procedures and controls to periodically analyze and evaluate overtime paid for wide‐
load escorts to ensure that overtime worked and paid complies with the Police Commissioner’s
directive.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details BPD implemented a PCM for Wide-Load Escorts in January 2023
of corrective action or (updated in August 2023) that corrected this matter. The department is
explain disagreement. in the process of updating the Manual and its Policy, which will include
the guidance for Wide-Load Escort assignments.
BPD management was unaware of and did not approve the
aforementioned practices that have been in effect since at least 2011.
The BPD Police Commissioner issued a directive, effective January 1,
2023, significantly altering current practice. The directive authorized a
two-hour minimum overtime rate to be paid and if the actual time
worked on escorts during the period exceeded two hours, the officer
would be paid overtime for the actual hours incurred. In addition, the
directive mandated that, in all cases, actual time worked be recorded by
the officer.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/24
Please provide details BPD will be implementing the following:
of corrective action or 1. Using the third party vendor scheduling for certified employees
explain disagreement. to sign up for the Wide-Load escort assignments.
2. Training more employees to be eligible to escort wide loads.
3. PSS will audit the Wide-Load overtime earned in conjunction
with other policy violations.

--- Page 73 ---
Finding 9
BPD did not always maintain current executed agreements with third‐party entities employing officers
for internal secondary employment.
We recommend that BPD maintain current and fully executed agreements with entities employing
officers for internal secondary employment.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/24
Please provide details BPD has pro-actively been addressing these matters by engaging a third
of corrective action or party to manage secondary employment, and they will be handling any
explain disagreement. agreements with the vendors and certifying that they meet the BPD
terms and conditions. BPD has an active written agreement with the
third party vendor managing secondary employment.
Agreements with other police departments to work BPD secondary
employment as backup will be stored on BPD’s online document
control platform.

--- Page 74 ---
Finding 10
BPD performed virtually no monitoring of external secondary employment and did not maintain a
complete record of officers and entities approved for external secondary employment.
We recommend that BPD implement effective monitoring procedures over external secondary
employment as required in the SEP. Specifically, we recommend that BPD
a. conduct annual audits of employee eligibility for external secondary employment,
b. conduct background investigations and annual site visits of entities at which officers work
external secondary employment, and
c. maintain a complete and accurate record of officers and entities approved for external secondary
employment.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/31/24
Please provide details BPD has pro-actively been addressing these matters by engaging a third
of corrective action or party to manage secondary employment for the department. The third
explain disagreement. party under contract to manage BPD’s secondary employment will be
handling what was considered external secondary employment.
BPD will export an employee demographic file on a regular basis to the
third party vendor that will provide a list of employees who are at non-
full duty status and are prohibited from working secondary employment.
This information will restrict ineligible employees from signing up for
job postings.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 02/23/24
Please provide details BPD will establish an inspection process for secondary employment
of corrective action or sites to be managed by the Secondary Employment Unit
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 10c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 02/23/24
Please provide details The full-duty status information (employees eligible to work secondary
of corrective action or employment) is saved as employee demographic data within Workday.
explain disagreement. In addition, SEU will keep a list of approved and compliant “customer”
entities with the inspection/approval report.