Title: Maryland Department of Health - Health Regulatory Commissions
Date: 01/25/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=65b3c3e726459d2b7bd14e2c
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:12:21.335334
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Health Regulatory Commissions
January 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 25, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Health Regulatory
Commissions of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period
beginning July 9, 2018 and ending September 30, 2022. The Health Regulatory
Commissions consists of the following independent commissions:
 Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC)
 Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC)
 Maryland Community Health Resources Commission (MCHRC)
These three independent commissions are responsible for health-related functions,
including directing and administering the State’s health planning functions,
developing health care cost-containment strategies, reviewing and approving
hospital rates, and increasing health care access for low-income, underinsured,
and uninsured Marylanders.
Our audit disclosed that MHCC did not have adequate controls over the Maryland
Trauma Physicians Services Fund. Specifically, we noted that supervisory
reviews of Fund disbursements were not sufficiently comprehensive resulting in
improper payments to two trauma centers going undetected. In addition, MHCC
did not have formal procedures for recovering overpayments to the trauma centers
identified during periodic audits resulting in the failure to recover overpayments.
We also noted one individual had excessive controls over the Fund’s
recordkeeping, collections, and payments.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed certain cybersecurity-related findings. However,
in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the

--- Page 4 ---
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit also disclosed that HSCRC did not obtain approval from the Board of
Public Works for contract modifications totaling $293,000 and MHCC did not
always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)
within 30 days as required by State law. Specifically, our test of 3 contract
awards totaling $24.4 million, disclosed that MHCC had not posted 2 awards
totaling $16 million to eMMA.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the one MHCC
finding contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that the MHCC
did not satisfactorily address that finding, which is repeated in this report.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Commissions, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues. Additionally, in accordance with our policy,
we have edited MDH’s response to remove vendor names or products. Finally,
consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MDH’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Commissions. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and the Commissions’
willingness to address the current audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Law Changes 7
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund
* Finding 1 – The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) did not 8
have sufficient procedures and controls over the Maryland Trauma
Physician Services Fund payments and related collections.
User Fees
Finding 2 – MHCC did not have sufficient procedures and controls over 10
fees assessed on hospitals, nursing homes, insurance companies, and
health care practitioners. As a result, user fees for two hospitals
totaling $118,500 were not assessed and nursing homes collectively
were under assessed $717,000.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 12
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 12
Contracts
Finding 5 – The Health Services Cost Review Commission did not 12
always obtain required Board of Public Works approval for contract
modifications prior to execution, and MHCC did not always ensure
contract awards were published on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage, as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 17
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of
November 2023
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Health Regulatory Commissions is a budgetary unit of the Maryland
Department of Health that comprises three independent commissions established
by law: the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), the Health Services
Cost Review Commission (HSCRC), and the Maryland Community Health
Resources Commission (MCHRC).
MHCC is responsible for directing and administering the State’s health planning
functions, developing health care cost-containment strategies, and maintaining a
database of all non-hospital health care services. HSCRC is responsible for
establishing, reviewing, and approving hospital billing rates; monitoring hospital
compliance with approved billing rates; collecting data on hospital utilization and
quality; and administering the Hospital Uncompensated Care Fund, which
compensates hospitals for services provided to individuals unable to pay.
MCHRC is responsible for increasing health care access for low-income,
uninsured, and underinsured Marylanders by providing grants to community
health resources.
According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2022 expenditures for the MHCC,
HSCRC, and MCHRC totaled approximately $37.1 million, $122.5 million, $22.0
million, respectively (See Figure 1 on the following page).
MHCC operating expenditures are funded by user fees it assesses to hospitals and
other users that MHCC supports. MHCC and HSCRC also jointly administer the
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund, which reimburses trauma physicians
who provided uncompensated care and is funded by a $5 surcharge on all
Maryland vehicle registrations. In fiscal year 2022, MHCC’s operating
expenditures included payments totaling $11.7 million to designated trauma
centers and physicians from the Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund. In
addition, MHCC also paid $3.6 million to the University of Maryland Medical
System’s (UMMS) R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center as a pass-through
grant from the Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund.
HSCRC operating expenditures and the Hospital Uncompensated Care Fund are
funded by user fees assessed to hospitals. In fiscal year 2022, HSCRC’s
operating expenditures included payments totaling $98.5 million to hospitals from
the Hospital Uncompensated Care Fund and a grant totaling $6.2 million to the
Chesapeake Regional Information System for our Patients (CRISP), a non-profit
5

--- Page 8 ---
organization which functions as Maryland’s statewide health information
exchange.
MCHRC operating expenditures are generally funded primarily through payments
made by health care insurers in exchange for a premium tax exemption. In fiscal
year 2022, MCHRC’s operating expenditures included payments totaling $21.3
million as grants to various providers to expand access to health care from the
Community Health Resources Commission Fund. These grants were also funded
with $14 million in federal funds received in fiscal year 2022 from the American
Rescue Plan Act of 2021.
Figure 1
Health Regulatory Commissions Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
MHCC HSCRC MCHRC
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent Positions Percent Positions Percent
Filled 55 90.2% 44 91.7% 3 60.0%
Vacant 6 9.8% 4 8.3% 2 40.0%
Total 61 48 5
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent Expenditures Percent Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and $ 8,827,039 23.8% $ 7,672,378 6.2% $ 498,588 2.3%
Fringe Benefits
Technical and Special 186,601 0.5% 440,053 0.4% 86,068 0.4%
Fees
Operating Expenses 12,789,519 34.5% 9,659,867 7.9% 159,495 0.7%
Other Expenses1 15,297,285 41.2% 104,716,391 85.5% 21,267,236 96.6%
Total $37,100,444 $122,488,689 $22,011,387
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent Funding Percent Funding Percent
General Fund $ 4,000,000 10.8% $ 0 0.0% $ 0 0.0%
Special Fund 33,100,444 89.2% 122,488,689 100.0% 8,011,387 36.4%
Federal Fund 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 14,000,000 63.6%
Total $37,100,444 $122,488,689 $22,011,387
Source: State financial and personnel records
1
1 Includes payments made by MHCC from the Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund ($11.7
million) and funds provided by MHCC to UMMS’s Shock Trauma Center ($3.6 million);
includes payments made by HSCRC from the Hospital Uncompensated Care Fund ($98.5
million) and funds provided by HSCRC for CRISP ($6.2 million); and includes grants provided
by MCHRC to community health resources ($21.3 million).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Law Changes
Effective May 30, 2021, Chapter 741, Laws of Maryland 2021, established a
process to designate Health Equity Resources Communities (HERCs) to target
resources to reduce health disparities, improve health outcomes and access to
primary care, promote prevention services, and reduce health care costs and
hospital admissions and readmissions in certain geographic areas. This law also
required MCHRC to establish the Pathways to Health Equity Program to provide
the foundation and guidance for a permanent HERC program and also to provide
grants to specific entities through the Pathways to Health Equity Fund, a special
non-lapsing fund. The procedures and controls over the Pathways to Health
Equity Program grants were subject to review during our current audit.
Effective July 1, 2022, Chapter 713, Laws of Maryland 2022, transferred the
administration of the Coordinated Community Supports Partnership (CCSP) Fund
from the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to MCHRC and
added four positions to MCHRC’s existing five positions. The CCSP, in
conjunction with MSDE, was tasked with developing coordinated community
support partnerships, implementing related grant programs, and other tasks to
meet student behavioral health needs. The procedures and controls over
MCHRC’s grant programs were subject to review during our current audit.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated April 5, 2019. We determined that MHCC did not
satisfactorily address that finding, which is repeated in this report as Finding 1.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund
Finding 1
The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) did not have sufficient
procedures and controls over the Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund
payments and related collections.
Analysis
The MHCC did not have sufficient procedures and controls over the Maryland
Trauma Physician Services Fund payments and related collections. The Fund
provides payments to offset the cost of uncompensated medical care provided by
trauma physicians to patients at Maryland’s designated trauma centers and to
offset the trauma centers’ on-call expenses. According to MHCC’s records,
during fiscal year 2022, uncompensated medical care payments and trauma
centers’ on-call expenses totaled approximately $1.8 million and $8.8 million,
respectively.
 One individual had unilateral control over the Fund’s recordkeeping,
payments, and collections relating to uncompensated care. The individual
maintained certain Fund records, initiated claim payments, and received
checks for claim overpayments, which totaled approximately $71,000 during
fiscal year 2022. Under these conditions, funds could be misappropriated
without detection.
A similar condition has been commented upon in our two preceding audit
reports, dating back to 2015. In response to our preceding audit report,
MHCC indicated that it had not segregated these duties in response to our
2015 report due to employee turnover but had taken corrective action to
segregate these duties as of March 2019. However, current MHCC
management again advised us during our current audit that the duties were not
segregated due to employee turnover.
In addition, we found that MHCC relied on trauma physicians and centers to
self-report amounts due to the State without any independent verification.
Trauma physician and centers must reimburse MHCC for uncompensated
trauma-related costs previously paid by MHCC that were subsequently
recovered from a third party, such as an insurance company. MHCC relied
on the trauma physicians and centers to self-report the amounts due rather
than through an external auditor, which MHCC previously used. According
8

--- Page 11 ---
to MHCC management, it discontinued the use of an external auditor in
January 2018. As such, there was a lack of assurance that trauma physicians
and centers submitted all the required reimbursements. According to
MHCC’s records, during fiscal years 2019 to 2022, trauma physician and
centers reimbursed MHCC $412,000 related to third-party recoveries.
 MHCC could not provide documentation that it had pursued and recovered
$304,000 due from trauma physicians and centers identified during our
preceding audit. In response to that report, MHCC advised us that it would
establish procedures and take timely collection action for overpayments.2
During our current audit, MHCC had not established procedures to recover the
amounts due such as withholding future payments, sending dunning letters, or
forwarding outstanding overpayments to the Department of Budget and
Management’s Central Collection Unit (CCU).
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
segregation of the cash receipts, accounts receivable recordkeeping, and
reconciliation functions. State regulations require three written demands for
payment be made at 30-day intervals after which the account is to be sent to CCU.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHCC
a. separate the duties for Fund recordkeeping, payment, and collection
functions (repeat);
b. establish adequate procedures to identify potential overpayments; and
c. take timely action to resolve overpayments identified including those
noted above (repeat).
We advised MHCC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
2 Due to the lack of external audits identified in the preceding bullet, there were no amounts due
from activities during the current audit period.
9

--- Page 12 ---
User Fees
Finding 2
MHCC did not have sufficient procedures and controls over fees assessed on
hospitals, nursing homes, insurance companies, and health care
practitioners. As a result, user fees for two hospitals totaling $118,500 were
not assessed and nursing homes collectively were under assessed $717,000.
Analysis
MHCC did not have sufficient procedures and controls over the assessment and
collection of fees annually assessed on hospitals, nursing homes, insurance
companies, and health care practitioners (in this report, each entity is referred to
as a “user”). According to MHCC’s
records, annual user fees totaling
Figure 2
$17.9 million were assessed for
MHCC Fiscal Year 2023 User Fee Assessments by
fiscal year 2023 (see Figure 2).
Industry
These fees were historically
Total Percentage
Industry
submitted by the user to the Assessment Allocated
Maryland Department of Health Hospitals $ 6,996,130 39.0%
(MDH) Finance Office; however,
Insurance Companies 4,663,986 26.0%
beginning in July 2021, MHCC
Nursing Homes 3,408,371 19.0%
instructed payees to send payments
Health Care Practitioners 2,870,207 16.0%
directly to MHCC and
Total $17,938,694
consequently, $10 million in user
Source: MHCC financial records
fees have been received directly by
MHCC from July 2021 through
April 2023.
 MHCC did not have a procedure to ensure the propriety of the assessments on
which the billed fees were calculated. The assessments allocate the cost of
MHCC operations among the industries subject to MHCC oversight. In
accordance with State regulations, MHCC first allocates the cost to the four
industries based on its workload distribution calculation3 and then allocates
the amount to entities within each industry based on various factors. For
example, allocations to hospitals are based on a ratio of the individual
hospital’s annual admissions and revenue to the total admissions and revenue
for all hospitals. Our review disclosed that assessments for fiscal years 2022
and 2023 continued to use the workload distribution calculated in December
2016, which was applicable for the period from fiscal years 2018 through
3 The workload distribution calculation apportions MHCC operating costs based on support
services currently provided by MHCC to each industry.
10

--- Page 13 ---
2021. We determined that this resulted in MHCC under-allocating $717,000
in costs for fiscal year 2023 to nursing homes, which were instead allocated to
hospitals, insurance companies, and health care practitioners.
In addition, our review of user fee assessments for the hospital industry
disclosed that the MHCC omitted two hospitals resulting in those costs being
spread among the remaining hospitals. Specifically, our comparison of
hospitals which were assessed user fees by MHCC in fiscal years 2021 and
2022 to a listing of hospitals maintained by HSCRC disclosed that MHCC did
not assess user fees at two hospitals totaling $118,500. As a result, the
amount due from these hospitals was improperly assessed and collected from
the other hospitals.
 MHCC also did not properly segregate duties related to these assessments and
related collections. Specifically, one employee was unilaterally responsible
for calculating user fee assessments, maintaining the related receivable
records, and had access to the related collections. Furthermore, users were
instructed to submit payments directly to the same employee. Consequently,
errors and omissions, such as those previously noted as well as
misappropriations of the related funds may not be readily detected. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
segregation of the billing, accounts receivable recordkeeping, and cash
receipts functions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHCC
a. perform the fee assessment and workload distribution accurately using
current information;
b. retroactively assess and refund the aforementioned improperly allocated
costs; and
c. ensure duties are properly separated including the assessment, accounts
receivable, and access to the related collections.
We advised MHCC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 3 and 4 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDH’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Contracts
Finding 5
HSCRC did not always obtain required Board of Public Works approval for
contract modifications prior to execution, and MHCC did not always ensure
contract awards were published on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
(eMMA), as required.
Analysis
HSCRC did not always obtain required Board of Public Works (BPW) approval
for contract modifications, and MHCC did not always ensure contract awards
were published on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA),4 as required.
 HSCRC did not obtain BPW approval for certain contract modifications over
$50,000, as required. Specifically, our test of all four contract modifications
over $50,000 processed by HSCRC from August 2018 through October 2022
totaling $1.3 million, disclosed that HSCRC had not obtained BPW approval
for two contract modifications totaling $293,000 as of February 2023. State
4 eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) is an internet-based, interactive procurement system
managed by the Department of General Services (DGS). Effective July 2019, DGS replaced
eMaryland Marketplace with eMMA.
12

--- Page 15 ---
laws and regulations require contract modifications that change the amount of
the contract by more than $50,000 to be submitted to BPW for approval.
 MHCC did not always publish contract awards on eMMA within 30 days of
award as required by State law and procurement regulations for contracts over
$50,000. Our test of three high dollar value professional services contract
awards totaling approximately $24.4 million made during the period from
May 2019 through December 2021 disclosed that as of November 2022, two
contract awards of $15.5 million and $492,000 had not been published for 11
and 19 months, respectively, after the award. MHCC awarded 21 contracts
totaling $29.5 million that were over $50,000 during our audit period.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that
a. HSCRC seek the required BPW approval for all contract modifications
and retroactively submit the aforementioned contract modifications to
the BPW for approval; and
b. MHCC publish contract awards on eMMA as required, including those
noted above.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Health Regulatory
Commissions of the Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning July
9, 2018 and ending September 30, 2022. The Commissions consist of the
Maryland Health Care Commission, the Health Services Cost Review
Commission, and the Maryland Community Health Resources Commission. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Commissions’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included hospital rate monitoring, the Maryland Trauma
Physician Services Fund, grant programs, contract procurement and monitoring,
hospital uncompensated care, and accounts receivable. We also determined the
status of the finding included in the Commissions’ preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Commissions by
MDH. These support services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are generally included within the scope of
our audit of MDH’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on the Commissions’ procedures
and controls in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and
other auditing procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring
during our audit period of July 9, 2018 to September 30, 2022, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Commissions’ operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
14

--- Page 17 ---
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Specific items for testing were selected directly from the Commissions’
records. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Commissions’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Commissions,
were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
15

--- Page 18 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Commissions’ ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Commissions that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to the Commissions and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MDH’s response, on behalf of the Commissions, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH
regarding the results of our review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of November 2023 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
1 Medical Care Programs Administration Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/23
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director for
Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
2 Office of the Secretary and Other Units Disabilities 10/19/23
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing
and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
3 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
Developmental Disabilities
4 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Administration
Behavioral Health Administration and  Behavioral Health Administration
Medical Care Programs Administration  Medical Care Programs Administration
5 10/25/22
- Administrative Service Organization Administrative Service Organization for
for Behavioral Health Services Behavioral Health Services
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
6 10/24/22
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institute for Children and Children and Adolescents
7 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
8 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
 Office of Population Health Improvement
Prevention and Health Promotion
 Office of Preparedness and Response
Administration Office of Population
 Office of Provider Engagement and
9 Health Improvement Office of 02/23/21
Regulation – Office of Controlled
Preparedness and Response, and Office
Substances Administration
of Provider Engagement and Regulation
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulation – Prescription Drug Monitoring
Program
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of November 2023 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 22 Health Professional Boards and
10 Regulatory Services Commissions 01/19/21
 The Office of Health Care Quality
11 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
12 Pharmacy Services  Kidney Disease Program 08/31/20
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and
Treatment Program
13 Spring Grove Hospital Center Spring Grove Hospital Center 04/22/20
Managed Care Program, known as
Medical Care Programs Administration
14 HealthChoice including oversight of the nine 04/22/20
– Managed Care Program
private Managed Care Organizations
15 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 04/10/20
16 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center 03/17/20
17 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center 03/26/19
18 Springfield Hospital Center Springfield Hospital Center 12/06/18
19 Eastern Shore Hospital Center Eastern Shore Hospital Center 11/19/18
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX
January 19, 2024
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department
of Health – Health Regulatory Commissions for the period beginning July 9, 2018, and ending
September 30, 2022.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email
at frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Laura Herrera Scott, M.D.
Secretary
Enclosure
cc: Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Marie Grant, Assistant Secretary for Health Policy, MDH
Michael J. Steffen, Executive Director, Maryland Health Care Commission
Jonathan Kromm, Executive Director, Health Services Cost Review Commission
Mark A. Luckner, Executive Director, Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
Randolph S. Sergent, Esq., Chair, Maryland Health Care Commission
Joshua M. Sharfstein, M.D., Chair, Health Services Cost Review Commission
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, MDH

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Health Regulatory Commissions
Agency Response Form
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund
Finding 1
The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) did not have sufficient procedures and
controls over the Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund payments and related
collections.
We recommend that MHCC
a. separate the duties for Fund recordkeeping, payment, and collection functions
(repeat);
b. establish adequate procedures to identify potential overpayments; and
c. take timely action to resolve overpayments identified including those noted above
(repeat).
We advised MHCC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MHCC concurs with the audit finding and has implemented
corrective action or corrective actions. MHCC notes that after the most recent previous
explain disagreement. audit, the agency took the recommended steps to appropriately
segregate duties between two employees. The fiscal analyst
performing a key role retired near the end of the audit period
without giving standard two-week notice. A hiring process has been
completed and a new employee has assumed the duties of the fiscal
analyst previously performing those duties.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/01.2024
Please provide details of MHCC concurs with the OLA’s recommendation and is
corrective action or reinstituting an audit process that reflects the amount of funds at
explain disagreement. risk. MHCC currently has a contract out for bid for the audit
services. We estimate that the contract will be awarded by March 1.
2024.
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Health Regulatory Commissions
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of
corrective action or MHCC will conform with this audit recommendation to resume
explain disagreement. audits of hospital on-call payments. Trauma center hospitals do not
receive uncompensated care payments and are not subject to the
repayment request. Trauma center hospitals receive payments for
the on-call payments they have made to trauma physicians,
orthopedists, anesthesiologists, and neurosurgeons that take trauma
call. The MHCC believes the audits of on-call payments will yield
few recoveries because the requested on-call payments represent a
40%-50% share of the trauma centers actual on-call payments. The
costs for the audits will be absorbed by the Trauma Fund. Though
this was a repeat finding, the MHCC corrected the on-call payments
identified in FY 2020.
User Fees
Finding 2
MHCC did not have sufficient procedures and controls over fees assessed on hospitals,
nursing homes, insurance companies, and health care practitioners. As a result, user fees
for two hospitals totaling $118,500 were not assessed and nursing homes collectively were
under assessed $717,000.
We recommend that MHCC
a. perform the fee assessment and workload distribution accurately using current
information;
b. retroactively assess and refund the aforementioned improperly allocated costs; and
c. ensure duties are properly separated including the assessment, accounts receivable,
and access to the related collections.
We advised MHCC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Health Regulatory Commissions
Agency Response Form
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The MHCC concurs with this audit recommendation. The agency
corrective action or has updated the User Fee Assessment Report. The Commission
explain disagreement. approved the report in December 2023. The update will be posted on
the Commission’s website and the regulations will be published in
the Maryland Register in January 2024 with a 90-day comment
period.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of
corrective action or The MHCC concurs that two hospitals were inadvertently missed in
explain disagreement. the most recently completed assessment period. Staff recalculated
both years that the hospitals were over assessed due to the non-
inclusion of the 2 new hospitals which impacted all other hospital
assessments. Hospitals that were over assessed were issued a
reduction in their 2024 assessment.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MHCC concurs with this recommendation and has implemented the
corrective action or auditors’ suggestions regarding the processing of payments using
explain disagreement. existing personnel to appropriately segregate duties regarding the
processing of payments. MHCC has implemented the auditors’
suggestions regarding the processing of payments using existing
personnel to appropriately segregate duties regarding the processing
of payments. MHCC has implemented a process which meets audit
standards using internal staff and ensure the appropriate
segregation of duties.
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Health Regulatory Commissions
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security
and Control section, including Findings 3 and 4 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDH’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, MDH’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Health Regulatory Commissions
Agency Response Form
Contracts
Finding 5
HSCRC did not always obtain required Board of Public Works approval for contract
modifications prior to execution, and MHCC did not always ensure contract awards were
published on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA), as required.
We recommend that
a. HSCRC seek the required BPW approval for all contract modifications and
retroactively submit the aforementioned contract modifications to the BPW for
approval; and
b. MHCC publish contract awards on eMMA as required, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/23
Please provide details of Moving forward, the HSCRC will seek the required BPW approval
corrective action or for all contract modifications and retroactively submit the
explain disagreement. aforementioned contract modifications to the BPW for approval.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/23
Please provide details of MHCC concurs with this recommendation and will continue to devote
corrective action or its available resources to post awards in the required timeframe. MHCC
explain disagreement. notes that contract input and processing in the eMMA Advantage
application includes a complex signoff process with multiple agency and
DGS personnel involved which the agency does not control.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Ibijoke O. Owolabi, CPA
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors