Title: Maryland Department of Health - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration - Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services - Follow-up Review Status


Maryland Department of Health – Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration – Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services – Status Report as of December 31, 2023
Date: 02/09/2024
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=65cccb2bc04983499277003e
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:12:37.881453
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
February 9, 2024
Re: Audit of Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical
Care Programs Administration – Administrative
Service Organization for Behavioral Health
Services
Report Date: October 25, 2022
The Honorable Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
201 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Secretary Herrera Scott:
Our October 25, 2022 audit report of the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) and
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) – Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
for Behavioral Health Services of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) determined that
MDH’s accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory, based on our rating system.
The rating system was established, in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1221, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, for the purpose of determining an overall evaluation
of an agency’s fiscal accountability and compliance with State laws and regulations. In
accordance with a policy approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee, the Office of
Legislative Audits (OLA) performs a follow-up review of the status of the findings contained in
any audit report that is rated unsatisfactory.
To that end, initially in April 2023 we requested an implementation status from MDH for
the findings included in the report in conjunction with the aforementioned policy. In response to
our request, MDH on behalf BHA and MCPA’s ASO, provided a status report as of April 3,
2023, which indicated that none of the eight non-cybersecurity-related findings had been
substantially corrected – meaning that no recommendations had been fully implemented. We
have redacted the current status of one cybersecurity finding from this letter, in compliance with
the requirements of the State Government Article Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of

--- Page 2 ---
The Honorable Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., -2- February 9, 2024
Secretary
Maryland. This status was consistent with MDH’s response to the audit report and its
subsequent testimony to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee at a November 2022 hearing
in which it indicated that most of the findings would not be corrected under the existing ASO
contract and therefore implementation dates for most of the report recommendations were in
December 2023 and 2024. Accordingly, OLA concluded that conducting a follow-up review at
that time would not be effective or an efficient use of our resources, and that in January 2024 we
would request a revised status report from MDH.
Consequently, in a January 11, 2024 letter, OLA requested that MDH provide an updated
status report of all findings in the October 25, 2022 audit report, as of December 31, 2023. In
response to OLA’s request, on January 31, 2024, MDH provided a status report which indicated
that the majority of BHA and MCPA’s ASO audit report findings still had not been substantially
corrected and that these recommendations would be implemented in calendar year 2024.
Based upon the self-reported lack of substantial progress in addressing the prior report
findings and the proximity to our next audit of BHA and MCPA’s ASO for Behavioral Health
Services of MDH, which is scheduled to commence during the third quarter of calendar year 2024,
OLA has concluded that it would not be an effective and efficient use of our resources to perform
the formal follow-up review. As such, we will review the actions taken with respect to the
recommendations in the prior audit report in our upcoming audit of BHA and MCPA’s ASO for
Behavioral Health Services of MDH.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Ryan B. Moran, Dr.P.H., Deputy Secretary, Health Care Financing & Medicaid
Director, MDH
Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Alyssa S. Lord, Deputy Secretary, BHA
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, MDH
Michael L. Harrison, Chief of Staff, BHA
Warren Waters, Jr., Chief of Staff, Health Care Financing, MCPA
Tricia C. Roddy, Deputy Medicaid Director, MCPA
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services