Title: Executive Department - Office of the Governor - Boards, Commissions, and Offices - Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Date: 04/12/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66193da09b66d2ad3aef43d0
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:13:57.304484
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Executive Department
Office of the Governor
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
April 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 12, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Executive Department for the period beginning November 19, 2018 and ending
February 28, 2023.
Office of the Governor
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
The Department provides oversight, guidance, and coordination to units within
the Executive Department and to other budgetary units within the Executive
Branch of State government.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the Department’s efforts to satisfactorily address the
relevant findings contained in our preceding audit report. We also wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the Department.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Executive Department – Office of the Governor provides oversight, guidance,
and coordination to units within the Executive Department and to other budgetary
units within the Executive Branch of State government. The Department also
provides the public with information about the Governor’s policies and goals, and
about the functions of State government. According to the State’s accounting
records, the Office of the Governor’s expenditures were approximately $13.4
million for fiscal year 2023. As of June 30, 2023, 15.3 percent of the
Department’s positions (including those units described below) were vacant (see
Figure 1 on the following page).
The Boards, Commissions, and Offices unit consists of various entities, including
the Governor’s Office of Community Initiatives, which were created by statute or
executive order to provide planning and coordination for Executive Branch
functions. According to the State’s accounting records, these entities’
expenditures were approximately $17.1 million during fiscal year 2023 (see
Exhibit 1).
The Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing advocates for and promotes the
general welfare of individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing, and provides,
advocates for, and coordinates the adoption of public policies, regulations, and
programs that will benefit deaf and hard of hearing individuals. According to the
State’s accounting records, this Office’s expenditures were approximately
$493,000 during fiscal year 2023.
These expenditures combined are shown in Figure 1 on the following page.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Governor
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 127 84.7%
Vacant 23 15.3%
Total 150
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $19,287,655 62.2%
Technical and Special Fees 1,050,541 3.4%
Operating Expenses 10,649,195 34.4%
Total $30,987,391
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $23,324,270 75.3%
Special Fund 599,855 1.9%
Federal Fund 6,336,979 20.5%
Reimbursable Fund 726,287 2.3%
Total $30,987,391
Source: State financial and personnel records
Organizational Changes
Effective March 7, 2020, Chapter 11, Laws of Maryland, 2020 renamed the
Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention to the Governor’s Office of
Crime Prevention, Youth and Victim Services (GOCPYVS). This law also
renamed the Governor’s Office for Children to the Division of Children and
Youth and transferred it from a standalone Office to GOCPYVS. Due to the
increasing financial significance of GOCPYVS activities, we have decided to
separately audit GOCPYVS. Consequently, GOCPYVS activities since
November 19, 2018 are excluded from this audit report and will be included in a
separate forthcoming audit of GOCPYVS.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Effective July 1, 2022, Chapter 451, Laws of Maryland, 2022 established the
Commission on African American History and Culture (CAAHC) as an
independent unit in the Executive Branch of State Government. Previously,
CAAHC was a unit within the Boards, Commissions, and Offices in the Executive
Department. The activities of CAAHC through June 30, 2022 are included in the
scope of this audit and activities after that date will be included in a separate audit
of CAAHC.
Federal Investigation and Settlement
The Governor’s Office of Service and Volunteerism (GOSV), a program within
the Governor’s Office on Community Initiatives, was subject to a federal
investigation related to its use of AmeriCorps grants. The grants were multi-year
awards from January 1, 2016 through December 31, 2021 totaling $2.1 million,
whose purpose was promoting and recognizing volunteer activities throughout the
State, as well as recognizing youth groups who were active in their community.
In December 2022, as a result of the federal investigation of the grant period from
January 2016 to December 2019, GOSV and the United States (US) Attorney’s
Office entered into a settlement agreement in which the US Attorney contended
that GOSV violated the terms of the grant requirements in the following three
areas:
 GOSV distributed donated Baltimore Orioles and Maryland State Fair
tickets, which were intended for volunteers, to individuals who were not
eligible under the AmeriCorps grant, including GOSV employees.
 GOSV charged employee salaries to the AmeriCorps grant without
supporting documentation that the employees worked on the AmeriCorps
grant.
 GOSV overcharged AmeriCorps for certain expenses.
The donated tickets were used by GOSV to satisfy matching contribution
requirements of the federal grant and the improper use of the tickets disqualified
them for this purpose. GOSV ultimately agreed to pay $639,916 to the federal
government and entered into a Compliance Agreement to ensure future
compliance with AmeriCorps grant procedures.
State Grants Audit
On November 10, 2021, we issued a performance audit report on State Grants to
assess the State’s policies and guidance for advertising, awarding, and monitoring
5

--- Page 8 ---
State-funded grants. The report contained three findings related to the Governor’s
Grants Office (GGO), which is a program within the Boards, Commissions, and
Offices. The report noted specifically:
 The State did not have statewide comprehensive laws, regulations, policies, or
procedures governing the creation, award, and administration of State grants.
 The State did not have standardized grant applications and grant agreements.
As a result, certain agencies did not include critical provisions in grant
agreements.
 The State did not have a statewide grants manager system to help administer
and track grant awards and related expenditures.
GGO generally agreed with the findings and related recommendations. We did
not review the current status of the findings in the State Grants audit report during
this audit because based on GGO’s response to the audit report, implementation
of the recommendations is pending the completion of a report which is not due
until July 1, 2024.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of three of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated November 12, 2019. We
determined that the Department satisfactorily addressed these findings. The status
of the other finding (Finding 1) as well as part of Finding 4 will be reviewed
during our audit of GOCPYVS.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Department’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Findings that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately
communicated to the Department.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Department. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Executive Department for the period beginning November 19, 2018 and ending
February 28, 2023.
Office of the Governor
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Department’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, equipment, disbursements, grants,
budgetary and year-end closing transactions, federal funds, information systems,
and payroll.
Our audit included various support services (such as payroll and processing
vendor payment transmittals) provided by the Executive Department – Office of
the Governor on a centralized basis to certain units and agencies within the
Executive and Administrative Control area of State Government (such as the
Department of Disabilities and Secretary of State). Effective June 30, 2020,
Executive Department – Office of the Governor no longer provided support
services to the Maryland Energy Administration. As previously requested by the
Governor’s Office, our audit also included activities related to the operation and
maintenance of Government House (for example, inventory record keeping), even
though the Department of General Services receives an appropriation for and
performs these activities. We also determined the status of three of the four
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of the Department’s compliance with those laws and regulations
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administrated by State agencies, including the
Department.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 19, 2018 to February 28, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Department’s operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from various systems of the Department for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as equipment. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
8

--- Page 11 ---
The Department’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Department, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Executive Department
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Fiscal Year 2023
Name of Board, Commission, or Office Positions Expenditures
1 Survey Commission 0 $ 139,503
Governor's Office of Small, Minority and Women
2
Business Affairs 11 1,396,344
3 Governor's Office of Community Initiatives 15 9,803,801
4 State Ethics Commission 12 1,513,576
5 Health Care Alternative Dispute Resolution Office 5 561,959
6 State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy 0 714,020
7 Governor's Grants Office 2 363,599
8 State Labor Relations Boards 2 491,847
9 Maryland State Board of Contracts Appeals 8 1,298,650
10 Governor's Coordinating Offices-Shared Services 3 823,507
11 The Maryland Corp Program* 0 0
Total 58 $17,106,806
Source: Budget Book
* Chapter 37, Laws of Maryland, 2022 expanded the program and separated it from the Governor's Office on
Service and Volunteerism. Prior to fiscal year 2024, funding for the program was under the Governor's Office of
Community Initiatives.
10

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Mya N. Cofield
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Staff Auditors