Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Information Technology Division - Annapolis Data Center and Network Operations
Date: 04/22/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6629594f9d7d52745cf012c1
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:14:05.469220
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Annapolis Data Center and Network Operations
April 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 22, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Comptroller of Maryland (COM) – Information Technology
Division (ITD). ITD operates the Annapolis Data Center which provides
computing resources and operates as a computer services bureau for COM and
other customer agencies. ITD also operates an internal network that provides
services including internet, Statewide Government Intranet (SwGI), and remote
access, and file sharing to all COM divisions and offices. This audit represents
the second of two fiscal compliance audits of the ITD and consists of an internal
control review of the data center and network administered by ITD. Our audit did
not include ITD’s fiscal operations which are audited separately by us and are
reported upon in an audit report of the same name.
Our audit disclosed certain cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report. However, since these are cybersecurity-
related findings, the current status of these findings has been redacted.

--- Page 4 ---
COM’s response to this audit, on behalf of ITD, is included as an appendix to this
report; however, consistent with the requirements of State law, we have redacted
all elements of COM’s response since they are related to the cybersecurity
findings. We reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations,
and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address
all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by ITD.
We also wish to acknowledge COM’s and ITD’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Information Technology
Finding 1 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 5
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 5
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 5
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 6
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 9
Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions as of
March 2024
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Information Technology Division (ITD) operates the Annapolis Data Center
as a computer service bureau, and all operating costs are reimbursed by user
agencies that are charged for services performed. ITD also develops and
maintains application systems for agencies under the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) and provides data center disaster recovery capabilities. Additionally, ITD
maintains the mainframe operating system and security software environment in
which many agency applications are executed. Some of the applications
supported by ITD include the State’s integrated tax system (COMPASS1), the
State’s payroll systems, the State’s Financial Management Information System,
and the State’s Medicaid Management Information System.
ITD operates an internal network that provides services, including internet and
statewide intranet access, email, and file sharing, to all divisions and offices of
COM. According to the State’s records, ITD fiscal year 2022 expenditures
totaled $42 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 27, 2020. However, since these are
cybersecurity-related findings, the current status of these findings has been
redacted.
1 COMPASS is the State’s new integrated tax system being implemented over several years in
four phases to replace its legacy mainframe tax system, SMART. The first and second phases
were launched in July 2020 and February 2021, respectively.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 1
through 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with COM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Comptroller of Maryland (COM) – Information Technology
Division (ITD). Fieldwork associated with our audit of ITD was conducted
during the period from February 2022 to January 2023. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ITD’s internal
control over the Annapolis Data Center and the COM network and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer
systems that support COM and ITD data center user agencies. Specifically, given
ITD’s widespread responsibility for the COM network, our audit included an
evaluation of the security control environment for all portions of the COM
network controlled by ITD. A description of the specific information systems and
related control functions addressed by the audit have been redacted from this
report as required by State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) described
below.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. As noted, the areas addressed by
the audit have been redacted from this report. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report for ITD’s data center and
network operations.
Our audit did not include ITD’s fiscal operations which are audited separately
within an ITD fiscal operations audit report. The most recent fiscal compliance
report that covered ITD’s fiscal operations was issued on February 2, 2022.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, certain tests to
evaluate the effectiveness of controls, and to the extent practicable, observations
of ITD’s operations. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
6

--- Page 9 ---
ITD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets
(including information systems resources); and compliance with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing
Standards, there are five components of internal control: control environment,
risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and
monitoring. Each of the five components, when significant to the audit
objectives, and as applicable to ITD, were considered by us during the course of
this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ITD’s ability to operate information systems resources effectively
and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our
report also includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to ITD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that all findings in this report fall
7

--- Page 10 ---
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to ITD and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from COM, on behalf of ITD, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit
report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance
with State law. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise COM regarding the results of
our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions
As of March 2024
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Processing, evaluating, verifying, and
recording tax data as reported by taxpayers and
Revenue Administration
1 other parties 01/22/24
Division
 Collection of tax receipts
 Distribution of tax refunds
 Management of the State payroll system
 Non-budgeted funds maintained for payroll
deductions
10/05/23
2 Central Payroll Bureau  Critical information systems
 Support services to other units of the
Comptroller for processing payroll
timekeeping records
 Procurement
 Equipment
Information Technology  Support services to other units of the
3 Division (Fiscal Comptroller for monitoring information 02/02/22
Operations) technology related services and maintaining
information technology equipment inventory
records
 Confiscated property
Field Enforcement
4  Business licenses 09/07/21
Bureau
 Routine inspections
 Investigations, collection of delinquent taxes,
and other taxpayer compliance activities
related to individual income taxes
 Audits and investigations, collection of
5 Compliance Division 12/18/20
delinquent taxes, and other taxpayer
compliance activities related to business taxes
 Identification, collection, and distribution of
unclaimed property
 State agency vendor payment processing
General Accounting  Vendor table maintenance
6 11/09/20
Division  State agency working funds
 Corporate purchasing card program
 Capital grants monitoring
 Procurement and disbursements
Office of the
 Corporate purchasing cards
Comptroller
7  Support services to other divisions of the 08/29/19
Bureau of Revenue
Comptroller, such as processing invoices,
Estimates
maintenance of accounting records, human
resources, and related fiscal functions
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX
Brooke E. Lierman
Comptroller
Andrew Schaufele
Chief Deputy Comptroller
April 4, 2024
108 Carroll Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed is the Comptroller’s response to your report on the Information Technology
Division issued in March 2024.
We have carefully reviewed each finding, and we believe that our responses fully
address each recommendation contained in the report. Should you need additional
information or clarification, please contact David Hildebrand, Director, Office of Risk
Management by email at dhildebr@marylandtaxes.gov or by telephone at 410-260-7768.
The Comptroller appreciates your objective appraisal of our operations and your
recommendations for continuous improvement and commends your auditors for their
professionalism and thorough review.
Sincerely,
Digitally signed by Robert
Robert O'Connor O'Connor
Date: 2024.04.09 11:26:42 -04'00'
Robert O’Connor
Chief Information Officer
Digitally signed by John U Hiter
John U Hiter Jr
Jr
Date: 2024.04.11 09:32:05 -04'00'
John Hiter
Director, Annapolis Data Center
Cc: Honorable Brooke Elizabeth Lierman, Comptroller
80 Calvert Street, Annapolis, Maryland 214040466 410-260-7310 1-800-552-3941 (MD) www.marylandtaxes.gov
Fax: 443-681-1065 MRS 711 (MD) TTY 410-260-7157 aschaufele@marylandtaxes.gov

--- Page 13 ---
Comptroller of Maryland - Information Technology Division -
Annapolis Data Center and Network Operations
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 1 through 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with COM’s responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, COM’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Michael K. Bliss
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Charles O. Price
Adam J. Steiner
Information Systems Staff Auditors