Title: Review of the Findings and Report by the State Chief Information Security Officer of Actions Taken by Eight Agencies to Resolve Certain Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2023 Joint Chairmen’s Report
Date: 04/29/2024
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=662fc48fb444b22885a92298
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:14:30.345703
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 29, 2024
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, Room 420
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 312
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Gentlemen:
In accordance with a requirement contained in the April 2023 Joint Chairmen’s Report
(JCR), pages 52 and 53, the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the findings and
report by the State Chief Information Security Officer (SCISO) of actions taken by eight
agencies to resolve certain repeat audit findings in calendar year 2022 OLA compliance audit

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 29, 2024
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
reports. The eight agencies identified in the JCR are the Baltimore City Community College,
Maryland Department of Environment, Morgan State University, Maryland Department of
Health, Maryland Department of Labor, Department of General Services, State Highway
Administration of the Maryland Department of Transportation, and Department of Human
Services.
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $250,000 of the appropriation made for the
purpose of Executive Direction for the Department of Budget and Management for fiscal year
2024, the eight aforementioned agencies must have met with the SCISO concerning their repeat
cybersecurity findings. Furthermore, the meeting was to identify and document a path for
resolution of any outstanding issues and to confirm that the agencies have taken corrective action
with respect to their cybersecurity audit findings, including articulating any ongoing associated
costs and a timeline for resolution if the corrective action is not complete. In addition, the JCR
required the SCISO to submit a report to OLA by February 1, 2024 addressing corrective actions
taken, a path and timeline for resolution of any outstanding issues, and any ongoing costs
associated with corrective actions. The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report
by May 1, 2024 to the budget committees and the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee listing
each repeat audit finding, along with information that demonstrates the agencies’ commitment to
correct each repeat audit finding.
In accordance with the April 2023 JCR requirement, the SCISO provided a report, dated
February 2024, summarizing its assessment of the actions taken by the eight agencies with
respect to the repeat audit findings. The SCISO status report indicated that two agencies had
taken corrective actions to address their respective repeat cybersecurity findings. The SCISO
status report indicated that a third agency had taken corrective actions to address one of its two
repeat cybersecurity findings and agreed to a course of action recommended by the SCISO to
address the remaining repeat cybersecurity finding. The SCISO status report indicated that four
agencies presented acceptable courses of action to address their respective repeat cybersecurity
findings. The SCISO status report did not comment on the status of the repeat finding included
in the prior report of an eighth agency since the SCISO did not consider the finding to be specific
to cybersecurity controls or weaknesses1.
We reviewed the SCISO status report to assess the implementation status of the related
recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Based on our review of the conclusions
summarized in the SCISO report, it is our opinion that seven of the agencies had either resolved
or developed courses of action that demonstrated a commitment to correct their repeat
1 The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), as processes
or capabilities wherein systems, communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation. Cybersecurity-related findings are designated by OLA using
our professional judgment and a conservative interpretation of this definition.

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- April 29, 2024
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
cybersecurity findings. Based on previous correspondence to OLA, we determined that the
actions described by the eighth agency (and unaddressed in the SCISO report) were sufficient to
address its repeat cybersecurity-related finding.
This public letter differs from the confidential letter previously provided to the
addressees, as detailed information and exhibits necessary for the budget committees and the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee to review and comment on the relevant information has
been redacted. This redaction was undertaken in accordance with the State Government Article
Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
We advised the eight agencies of the results of our review. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended by the SCISO during this review and the willingness of all agencies to
address the cybersecurity audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if
you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Katie Olson Savage, Department of Information Technology
Gregory S. Rogers, State Chief Information Security Officer, Department
of Information Technology
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services