Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Wicomico County
Date: 04/30/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663122f6f07fd75de1968bb3
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:14:38.640214
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Wicomico County, Maryland
April 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 30, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Wicomico County, Maryland for the period beginning November 6,
2019 and ending May 31, 2023. The Office oversees the administration of
decedents’ estates within Wicomico County and assists individuals who
administer estates.
Our audit disclosed Office employees were not required to prepare time records,
such as timesheets, either manually or online, and certain leave records were not
accurate. We also found the Office did not always obtain supporting
documentation for employee expense reimbursements or ensure that independent
reviews of reimbursements were performed.
Finally, we received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging, in
part, that a senior management employee hired and provided certain preferential
treatment to an employee who was a family member. Based on our review, we
were able to substantiate certain aspects of the allegation. Specifically, that the
employee received a promotion without meeting all the position requirements (see
Finding 1).
The Office’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while the Office
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. Most notably, in
response to Finding 1, the Office states that it will sometimes be necessary for

--- Page 4 ---
unauthorized individuals to sign checks which is a significant internal control
weakness.
In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included “auditor’s comments” within the Office’s response to explain our
position. Finally, there are other aspects of the Office’s response which will
require further clarification. We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with the Office.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information 4
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Potential Preferential Treatment
Finding 1 – The Office may have provided preferential treatment to an 6
employee who was promoted without meeting all of the position
requirements.
Preparing and Maintaining Time and Leave Records
Finding 2 – The Office did not maintain employee time records, such as 7
timesheets, and certain leave records were not accurate.
Employee Expense Reimbursements
Finding 3 – The Office did not always obtain supporting documentation 8
for expense reimbursements or ensure that independent reviews of
reimbursements were performed.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less the commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State's General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices' fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of the Register of Wills for Wicomico
County, its fiscal year 2022 gross receipts totaled $1,366,541, which consisted of
inheritance tax collections (net of commissions) of $901,923 and fees and
commissions of $464,618. As shown in Figure 1 on the following page, the
Office’s fiscal year 2022 operating expenses totaled $648,661 (primarily salaries
and wages), the majority of which represents costs paid directly by the
Comptroller, as noted above.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Register of Wills for Wicomico County
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 6 100.0%
Vacant 0 0.0%
Total 6
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 566,826 87.4%
Technical and Special Fees 13,398 2.0%
Other Operating Expenses 68,437 10.6%
Total $ 648,661
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Non-Budgeted Fund1 $1,366,541 100.0%
Total $1,366,541
Source: State financial and personnel records
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging, in part, that
a senior management employee hired and provided certain preferential treatment
to an employee who was a family member. Based on our determination of the
associated risk, we interviewed applicable personnel and reviewed applicable
personnel, payroll, and financial transactions. In addition, we sought guidance
from the State Ethics Commission regarding relevant provisions under State
ethics law. Based on our review, we were able to substantiate certain concerns
raised in the allegation (see Finding 1).
1 The Office’s funding consisted of inheritance tax collections (net of commissions) of $901,923
and fees and commissions of $464,618.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Potential Preferential Treatment
Background
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging, in part, that
a senior management employee hired and provided certain preferential treatment
to an employee who was a family member. The allegation indicated that the
family member was given preferential treatment in their work schedule such as
free time off and was given pay raises unfairly.
We examined the working relationship between these two employees by
interviewing Office personnel and reviewing applicable personnel, payroll, and
financial transactions. While we were able to confirm that in July 2015, the
senior management employee was directly involved in hiring a relative as an
employee in the Office, senior management personnel at the State Ethics
Commission advised us that the relationship does not constitute a qualifying
relative under State ethics law. As a result, the relationship did not constitute a
violation of State ethics law. In addition, we could not substantiate the allegation
that the related employee was given preferential treatment in their work schedule
such as free time off, since the Office did not maintain time records, such as
timesheets, and the Office’s leave records were not always accurate (refer to
Finding 2).
We were able to substantiate certain other aspects of the allegation. Our review
did not identify any matters that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General’s Criminal Division but did identify certain deficiencies that require
corrective action by the Office, as further described in the finding below.
Finding 1
The Office may have provided preferential treatment to an employee who
was promoted without meeting all of the position requirements.
Analysis
The Office may have provided preferential treatment to an employee who was
related to a senior management employee by reclassifying (promoting) the
employee without meeting all the requirements. We found that the related
employee received four position reclassifications between July 2016 and July
2021 that were approved by the senior management employee. Based on
available records, we concluded that the employee did not meet the written
minimum education and experience requirements for one of those four
reclassifications.
6

--- Page 9 ---
On a matter unrelated to the allegation, we also noted that the related employee
signed three expense reimbursement checks for other employees even though the
employee was not an authorized check signer. The employee signed the checks
using the name of an authorized signer. We were advised that Office
management was aware of this activity.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure and adequately document that all education and experience
requirements for employee position reclassifications have been met before
processing a reclassification, and
b. ensure that reimbursement checks are signed only by authorized signers.
Preparing and Maintaining Time and Leave Records
Finding 2
The Office did not maintain employee time records, such as timesheets, and
certain leave records were not accurate.
Analysis
Office employees were not required to prepare time records, such as timesheets,
either manually or online, and certain leave records were not accurate.
Specifically, the Office did not maintain a record of each employee’s days and
hours worked for each pay period, or the employee’s written or formal attestation
of time worked and corresponding supervisor’s approval. As a result, the Office’s
payroll, including approval of exception time reports, was processed and
submitted to the Central Payroll Bureau without comparison to individual
employee time records. This practice is contrary to that of five other Register of
Wills offices we contacted, each of which required employee time records to be
prepared and submitted for approval.
We further noted that although leave records were maintained based on leave
requests submitted by employees and approved by supervisory personnel, the
records were not always accurate. Specifically, we noted that when the Office
converted its manual leave records to an electronic format in August 2022, the
beginning converted balance for one employee exceeded the ending manual
balance by 220 hours. This discrepancy had not been corrected at the time of our
review, and the Office could not readily explain how the discrepancy occurred.
At the time of our review the Office had six employees with payroll earnings of
approximately $394,000 in fiscal year 2022. The Comptroller of Maryland’s
7

--- Page 10 ---
Accounting Procedures Manual generally requires preparation of positive time
records by employees.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. require the preparation of positive time records by employees each pay
period, including documentation of the employee’s attestation of accuracy
and approval by supervisory personnel;
b. use the time records when processing and approving payroll for
submission to the Central Payroll Bureau;
c. maintain complete and accurate leave records on a timely basis; and
d. resolve the 220 hour leave balance discrepancy noted in this finding.
Employee Expense Reimbursements
Finding 3
The Office did not always obtain supporting documentation for expense
reimbursements or ensure that independent reviews of reimbursements were
performed.
Analysis
The Office did not always obtain supporting documentation for employee expense
reimbursements or ensure that independent reviews of reimbursements were
performed. Our test of 17 reimbursements totaling $3,758 disclosed that expenses
totaling $2,293 included in 9 reimbursements did not have adequate supporting
documentation, such as receipts, and 15 reimbursements totaling $3,519 had no
evidence of an independent review. Furthermore, $3,304 of the $3,519 was
reimbursed to the senior management employee commented upon in Finding 1.
During the period July 1, 2021 to April 30, 2023, Office employee expense
reimbursements totaled $4,171.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office ensure that all employee expense
reimbursement requests are adequately supported and independently
reviewed, including those noted above.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Wicomico County, Maryland for the period beginning November 6,
2019 and ending May 31, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, disbursements, bank accounts,
payroll and certain human resources activities, corporate purchasing card activity,
and administration of estates. In addition, we reviewed activities relating to the
working relationship between two employees based on a referral to our fraud,
waste, and abuse hotline.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services (such as certain
human resources, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided to the Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the
Comptroller. These support services are included within the scope of our audits
of the Office of the Comptroller.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 6, 2019 to May 31, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period, as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
9

--- Page 12 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
10

--- Page 13 ---
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 15 ---
Office of the Register of Wills
Wicomico County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Potential Preferential Treatment
Finding 1
The Office may have provided preferential treatment to an employee who
was promoted without meeting all of the position requirements.
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure and adequately document that all education and experience
requirements for employee position reclassifications have been met before
processing a reclassification, and
b. ensure that reimbursement checks are signed only by authorized signers.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide The relative in question was deemed to be in good standings with the
additional comments as Maryland Ethics Committee, based on a meeting with the Maryland
deemed necessary. Ethics Committee and the Register.
Auditor’s Comment: The response indicates that the Analysis is factually inaccurate,
and specifically notes that “The relative in question was deemed to be in good standings
with the Maryland Ethics Committee”. However, the report does not question the
employee’s standing with the State Ethics Commission, but in fact specifically states that
the relationship noted did not constitute a violation of State ethics law.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/2024
Please provide details of When reclassifying an employee, we should revise the description in
corrective action or the MS-22 to suit the position, including education, qualifications,
explain disagreement. time accrued and experience.
Recommendation 1b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/2024
Please provide details of There are only 5 employees in our office-so at times it will be
corrective action or necessary. In the absence of the Register and Chief Deputy, an
explain disagreement. employee not on the signature card will need to write and sign
checks for outgoing office bills in order to meet the due date. All
outgoing checks are copied and attached to outgoing bills and
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 16 ---
Office of the Register of Wills
Wicomico County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
approved by both the Chief Deputy and the Register at the end of
every month and yearly.
Auditor’s Comment: The response indicates that in the absence of the Register and
Chief Deputy, an employee not on the signature card will need to write and sign checks.
An employee who is not an authorized check signer as established with the applicable
bank should not be allowed to sign checks using the name of an authorized signer. Doing
so results in a significant internal control weakness.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 17 ---
Office of the Register of Wills
Wicomico County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Preparing and Maintaining Time and Leave Records
Finding 2
The Office did not maintain employee time records, such as timesheets, and
certain leave records were not accurate.
We recommend that the Office
a. require the preparation of positive time records by employees each pay
period, including documentation of the employee’s attestation of accuracy
and approval by supervisory personnel;
b. use the time records when processing and approving payroll for
submission to the Central Payroll Bureau;
c. maintain complete and accurate leave records on a timely basis; and
d. resolve the 220 hour leave balance discrepancy noted in this finding.
Agency Response
Analysis Disagree
Please provide Our office consists of 5 employees. Utilizing a timekeeping program was
additional comments as not feasible for our office. Once the time mistake was discovered by the
deemed necessary. auditor, it was corrected immediately.
Auditor’s Comment: The response indicates disagreement with the Analysis, and states
that using a timekeeping system was not feasible for the Office. Preparation of positive
time records by employees each pay period is a generally accepted practice that helps to
ensure both accountability and proper record keeping, and should not be restricted to
entities with a certain number of employees. We noted that the Office’s response to our
recommendation to prepare positive time records indicates that the Office has
implemented a time keeping system.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/2024
Please provide details of Upon the recommendation of the auditor, we implemented a new
corrective action or time keeping system.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/2024
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 18 ---
Office of the Register of Wills
Wicomico County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of As noted above, we have started a new procedure with timekeeping
corrective action or in Excel. Everything is now recorded by line item.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/2024
Please provide details of Time earned and taken every pay period-separate line and time used
corrective action or is entered every week by Chief Deputy and approved by Register.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/2024
Please provide details of This was an error-when brought to our attention it was corrected
corrective action or and entered into the system.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 19 ---
Office of the Register of Wills
Wicomico County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Employee Expense Reimbursements
Finding 3
The Office did not always obtain supporting documentation for expense
reimbursements or ensure that independent reviews of reimbursements were
performed.
We recommend that the Office ensure that all employee expense
reimbursement requests are adequately supported and independently
reviewed, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide Our employee handbook that was approved by the Comptroller,
additional comments as states that the Register, as an elected official, is not required to
deemed necessary. produce receipts. Please refer to COMAR 23.02.01.02(B)(5)(b)
Auditor’s Comment: The response indicates that the Analysis is factually inaccurate,
and states that the Register is not required to produce receipts. The Analysis accurately
addresses the fact that the Office did not always obtain supporting documentation for
employee expense reimbursements and provides certain related data. While the Register
is not specifically required to submit receipts for review, the submission and review of
receipts is a generally accepted control procedure used to help ensure the propriety of
expense reimbursement requests. We noted that the Office has agreed, going forward, to
have the Register submit receipts, which we agree will help provide transparency.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/2024
Please provide details of All employees provide receipts for reimbursements. While the
corrective action or Register of Wills is not required by law to provide receipts for
explain disagreement. reimbursement, going forward, the Register of Wills will provide
documentation for reimbursements for public transparency.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
John B. Wachter, CFE
Senior Auditor
John E. Rooney
Staff Auditor