Title: Review of the Actions Taken by Morgan State University to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2023 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 05/02/2024
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6633e614c73b664993eb2e4b
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:14:47.126278
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 2, 2024
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by Morgan State
University (MSU) to resolve the five repeat findings in our September 22, 2022 audit report.
This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement specified in the April 2023 Joint
Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page 192. The JCR required that, prior to the release of $500,000 of
its administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2024, MSU must take corrective action on all
repeat audit findings on or before November 1, 2023. The JCR language further provided that
OLA submit a report to the budget committees listing each audit finding along with a
determination that each finding was corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to
allow 45 days for the budget committees to review and release the funds prior to the end of the
fiscal year.
The September 22, 2022 audit report of MSU contained five repeat audit findings
(findings 1, 2, 3, 7, 8) that were addressed by nine recommendations. In accordance with the
April 2023 JCR requirement, MSU provided a status report to OLA, dated November 27, 2023,
which indicated it had fully corrected four of the findings and all but one recommendation
(Exhibit 1). We have edited MSU’s status report to remove certain vendor information, as
allowed by our policy.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- May 2, 2024
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
We reviewed the MSU status report and related documentation, performed limited tests
and analyses of the information, and held discussions with MSU personnel as necessary to assess
the implementation status of the related recommendations. Our review did not constitute an
audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
This public letter differs from the confidential letter previously provided to the
addressees, as detailed information and exhibits necessary for the budget committees to review
and comment on the relevant information has been redacted. This redaction was undertaken in
accordance with the State Government Article Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
Based on our review, for the component parts of four non-cybersecurity-related findings
we determined that MSU had resolved certain elements of Finding 1 and Finding 2, but had not
yet taken sufficient actions to correct Findings 3 and 7. Specifically, although MSU had
implemented certain elements of the recommendations related to Findings 3 and 7, the actions to
date did not address the entirety of the findings (Exhibit 2). Although, we concluded that
corrective action is still in progress (Exhibit 3), we did find that the actions taken to date
demonstrate a significant effort on MSU’s part to implement the audit recommendations.
After discussing our review results, MSU generally agreed with the accuracy of the
information presented. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the
review by MSU. We also wish to acknowledge MSU’s willingness to address the audit issues
and implement appropriate corrective actions. We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the
JCR requirement. Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Kweisi Mfume, Board of Regents Chairman, MSU
David K. Wilson, President, MSU
Abraham Mauer, Director of Internal Audits, MSU
David Lachina, Interim Executive Vice President of Finance and Administration, MSU

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- May 2, 2024
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Deborah Flavin, Associate Vice President of Finance and Administration, MSU
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Kelly K. Norton, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
MSU did not adequately monitor the vendor responsible for disbursing student refunds to
ensure the refunds were properly issued and unissued refunds were returned.
Confidentiality Notice – Elements of Finding 1 have been deemed to be cybersecurity-
related and subject to redaction in the publicly available report.
Recommendation 1a
We recommend that MSU perform independent reviews to ensure the vendor properly
issued refunds to students and returned any amounts not disbursed (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 1a
Status as of 11/1/2023 Completed Completion Date: September, 2023
The University has implemented the corrective action plan, as
recommended by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA). The Office of
the Bursar has implemented a process to independently ensure that the
vendor returns any amount not disbursed to students. This review is
documented. More specifically, reports from three systems are
independently reconciled and documented – University ERP system,
Please provide details of
third-party student refund management system, and State of Maryland’s
corrective action taken.
Financial Management Information System (FMIS) – to ensure student
refund payments that were authorized by the University were disbursed
properly and any amounts not disbursed are returned to the University
(e.g., student did not enter the correct bank routing number for direct
deposit or a check went stale and was not deposited within the required
timeframe).
Recommendation 1c
Redacted cybersecurity recommendation.
Status of Recommendation 1c
Status as of 11/1/2023 Select Status Completion Date:
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Please provide details of
corrective action taken.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 2
MSU did not independently verify the propriety of adjustments to student room and board
charges, certain of which were not processed in accordance with MSU policy.
Recommendation 2a
We recommend that MSU ensure that adjustments to student room and board charges are
properly supported and subject to an effective independent supervisory review for
propriety after being recorded in MSU’s automated records (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2a
Status as of 11/1/2023 Completed Completion Date: August, 2022
The University has implemented the corrective action plan by ensuring
adjustments to student room and board charges are properly supported and
subject to an effective independent supervisory review for propriety after
being recorded in the automated system. More specifically, a supervisor,
who is independent of the business process and does not have access in
the automated system to post adjustments, has reviewed all room and
Please provide details of board adjustments which were executed in the Fall 2021 (i.e., the start of
corrective action taken. the current audit period) through the Spring 2023 semesters for propriety
by ensuring those adjustments were properly authorized, supported, and
accurately computed and posted. This independent review was conducted
only after the transactions were entered to the system and is based on
system output reports. The independent review is effective and
documented sufficiently. This review is conducted at the end of each
semester.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 3
Reviews of changes to student residency status were either not documented or not
independent; and certain changes were not subject to review because system output reports
used for this purpose were incomplete.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSU ensure that independent documented supervisory reviews of
student residency changes are performed using output reports that include all changes
made (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3
Status as of 11/1/2023 Completed Completion Date: May, 2023
The University has implemented the corrective action plan by enhancing
its process to ensure that independent documented supervisory reviews of
student residency changes are performed using output reports that include
all changes made in the automated system. More specifically, an
Please provide details of employee who is independent of the process has generated system output
corrective action taken. reports reflecting residency status changes which were executed by staff
in the automated system, and has ensured that those changes are
appropriate, comply with the policy, and are properly supported. This
review was documented and covers the Spring 2021 through Spring 2023
semesters, and will recur twice a year or more if deemed necessary.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Contracts and Disbursements
Finding 7
MSU did not procure certain goods and services in accordance with its policies and
procedures, and did not ensure related goods and services were received and amounts
invoiced were proper.
Recommendation 7a
We recommend that MSU competitively procure and execute contracts in accordance with
its policies and procedures (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7a
Status as of 11/1/2023 Completed Completion Date: October, 2023
The Office of Procurement & Property Control has taken the necessary
steps to ensure that the University competitively procures and executes
contracts in accordance with its approved policies and procedures. A few
examples follow below.
 Installed a new procurement director and augmented professional
staff who have specialized knowledge and expertise in the area of
procurement compliance.
 Strengthened the training and development program for procurement
professionals to help ensure compliance with policies and procedures.
More specifically, several buyers have undergone training and
received certifications from the Maryland Procurement Academy and
participate in the Senior Procurement Advisory Group (SPAG)
Please provide details of meetings, which cover common procurement policy requirements and
corrective action taken. strategies for assuring compliance. In addition, management
reinforces the procurement policy and audit requirements at staff
meetings regularly and incorporates them to business processes.
 Developed and instituted tools, templates, and business processes to
help identify and support that the proper procurement method was
utilized and executed, governing agreement (e.g., ICPA or master
service agreement/contract) is complied with and authorization is
obtained, procurement is in the best interest of the State, and
emergency procurements strictly adhere to the policy requirements.
 Monitors reports to identify contracts that need to be rebid or
renewed/amended and tracks contract and expenditure dollar amounts
to ensure proper approvals are obtained.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 7d
We recommend that MSU verify that all goods and services have been received (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7d
Status as of 11/1/2023 In Progress Estimated Completion Date: April, 2024
The University has recently installed a new Director of Procurement who
has developed a robust plan to help ensure all goods and services are
received before payment is authorized. This includes recruiting
professionals with specific expertise, assigning responsibilities and
creating organizational structures, administering a training program, and
implementing various business processes, all of which will be completed
by the end of April 2024. More specifically, the procurement department
has moved towards procurement-based contracting, to the maximum
extent practicable. As a result, deliverables are required for payment of
work. The Technical Representatives (TR) are required to oversee the
Please provide details of
progression of work by the contractor to ensure the requirements of the
corrective action taken.
contract are met. A Contract Line Number (CLN) structure is included in
the solicitation which aligns to the payment of invoices and associated
deliverables; to ensure invoices are only paid for work performed. All
projects over $500,000 will be required to have a Quality Assurance
Surveillance plan (QASP) to ensure the contractor’s QC plan is working
and effective, to ensure deliverables are in accordance with the
requirements of the contract. A designation letter will be provided to the
Technical Representative outlining responsibilities as it relates to
overseeing the work, receipt of deliverables before payment, and
acceptance of work.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Confidentiality Notice –Finding 8 has been deemed to be cybersecurity-related and subject
to redaction in the publicly available report.
Status of Recommendation 8a
Status as of 11/1/2023 Select Status Completion Date:
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Please provide details of
corrective action taken.
Status of Recommendation 8b
Status as of 11/1/2023 Select Status Completion Date:
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Please provide details of
corrective action taken.
Status of Recommendation 8c
Status as of 11/1/2023 Select Status Completion Date:
Agency correction actions have been redacted by OLA.
Please provide details of
corrective action taken.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s September 22, 2022 Audit Report on
Morgan State University (MSU)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Student Accounts Receivable
1. We recommend that MSU
a. perform independent reviews to ensure the vendor properly
issued refunds to students and returned any amounts not Resolved
disbursed.
c. Redacted cybersecurity-related recommendation. Status Redacted1
2. We recommend that MSU
a. ensure that adjustments to student room and board charges
are properly supported and subject to an effective Resolved
independent supervisory review for propriety after being
recorded in MSU’s automated records.
3. We recommend that MSU ensure that independent documented
supervisory reviews of student residency changes are Not Resolved
performed using output reports that include all changes made. (In Progress)
1 Specific information of the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted from the publicly
available document in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s September 22, 2022 Audit Report on the
Morgan State University (MSU)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Contracts and Disbursements
7. We recommend that MSU
Not Resolved
a. competitively procure and execute contracts in accordance
(In-Progress)
with its policies and procedures.
d. verify that all goods and services have been received. Not Resolved
(In-Progress)
Information Systems Security and Control
8.
Status Redacted 2
a. Redacted cybersecurity-related recommendation.
b. Redacted cybersecurity-related recommendation. Status Redacted 2
c. Redacted cybersecurity-related recommendation. Status Redacted 2
2 Specific information of the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted from the publicly
available document in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 2, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Non-cybersecurity Related Findings
and Recommendations That Were Not Resolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 3
We recommend that MSU ensure that independent documented supervisory reviews of
student residency changes are performed using output reports that include all changes
made (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that MSU had assigned the supervisory review of student residency
changes to an independent employee. However, this employee left MSU in August 2023, and
MSU could not provide adequate documentation of reviews performed prior to the employee’s
departure. MSU advised us that, in December of 2023, a new employee was hired who would be
responsible for performing the review going forward. However, as of January 25, 2024, the
employee had not yet performed a review of student residency changes.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 7
We recommend that MSU
a. competitively procure and execute contracts in accordance with its policies and
procedures (repeat), and
d. verify that all goods and services have been received (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that, as indicated in its status report, MSU developed certain new templates
and forms to help ensure that procurements were made in accordance with its policies and
procedures, and that goods and services were received prior to payment. MSU also hired a new
Director of Procurement in October 2023. We were advised by the Director that the new
templates and forms have not yet been fully implemented, but should be by October 2024.
We reviewed three contracts totaling $8.9 million which were procured between August 2022
and November 2023, including one contract totaling $1 million procured through an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement. However, consistent with our original
audit report finding, we found that MSU did not verify that its use of a contract procured by
another entity, such as this contract, was in the best interest of MSU, and that the original
contract was awarded after an appropriate procurement process as required by MSU’s
procurement policies and procedures.