Title: Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and Other Units - Follow-up Review Status
Date: 05/07/2024
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663ce7e5ff1f3f431bff9d35
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:15:12.937193
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 7, 2024
Re: Audit of the Office of Secretary and Other Units
of the Maryland Department of Health
Report Date: October 19, 2023
The Honorable Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
201 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Secretary Herrera Scott:
Our October 19, 2023 audit report of the Office of the Secretary and Other Units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) determined that MDH’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory, based on our rating system. The rating system was established, in
accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1221, of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
for the purpose of determining an overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability and
compliance with State laws and regulations. In accordance with a policy approved by the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee, the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) performs a follow-up
review of the status of the findings contained in any audit report that is rated unsatisfactory.
To that end, in March 2024 we requested an implementation status from MDH for the
findings included in the report in conjunction with the aforementioned policy. In response to
our request, MDH’s Office of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance and Information Security
(IAC/S) on behalf of MDH, provided a status report, as of April 18, 2024.
This public letter differs from the confidential letter previously provided to you, as
detailed information in MDH’s status report deemed to be cybersecurity-related has been
redacted in accordance with State Government Article Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code
of Maryland.
The status report indicated that MDH estimated that the implementation of the necessary
corrective actions for the 12 non-cybersecurity-related findings would occur between June 30,

--- Page 2 ---
The Honorable Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., -2- May 7, 2024
Secretary
2024 and December 31, 2024. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the current status of
the 5 cybersecurity findings from this public copy of the letter.
Based on the current status reported by MDH’s IAC/S, OLA does not believe it would be
an effective or efficient use of our resources to conduct a follow up review of the referenced
Office of the Secretary and Other Units of the MDH audit report at this time. A copy of the
aforementioned status report relating to the non-cybersecurity findings for MDH is attached.
OLA will request an updated status report from MDH in August 2024 and, based on the MDH
implementation status contained therein, we will assess the practicality of conducting a follow-
up at that time.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair, Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair, House Appropriations Committee
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Bryan I. Mroz, Deputy Secretary, Operations, MDH
Secretary Katie Olson Savage, Department of Information Technology
Gregory S. Rogers, State Chief Information Security Officer, Department of Information
Technology
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary – Status Report as of April 18, 2024
Office of the Secretary Audit **
Audit Period - February 12, 2019 to June 30, 2022
IAC/S Audit Follow-up
Findings 17
Recommendations 40
Repeats 7
Finding/Recommendation Responses Estimated Completion IAC/S Comments
Date as of 4/18/24
Finding 1 - MDH did not have procedures to ensure MDH units properly entered all
provider payments into MMIS II and resolved any rejected claims to enable timely
and complete recovery of the funds.
We recommend that MDH
a.establish procedures to ensure that MDH units properly recorded all payments in MMIS MDH engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in 6/30/2024 In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
II and subsequently resolved any rejected claims, and identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the federal fund with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
accounting process. Through this engagement, MDH will develop documented vendor for updates on their progress.
processes for reconciling claims and accounting develop documented processes
for reconciling claims and accounting systems to ensure accurate recording of
payments and the timely resolution of rejected claims.
b.report the aforementioned unrecoverable funds to the Department of Budget and MDH is working to resolve all findings noted in OLA’s October 2022 fiscal 12/31/2024 In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
Management (DBM) and the budget committees and develop a plan to cover the related compliance audit reports on the Developmental Disabilities Administration with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
unfunded liabilities. (DDA) and the Behavioral Health Administration Administrative Services vendor for updates on their progress.
Organization (BHASO). As this process nears completion, MDH will formally
advise DBM and the budget committees of our progress and will develop a plan
for covering any unfunded liabilities. MDH also notes that the $106.7 million in
unresolved claims cited in the BHASO report has been reduced to $67 million as
of October 2023. However, complete resolution of unresolved BHASO claims is
unlikely to occur until the contract with the incumbent expires on December 31,
2024.
Finding 2 - MDH did not ensure critical quarterly reconciliations were performed,
resulting in the failure to recover $973.3 million of federal funding timely and lost
investment income totaling $6.4 million.
We recommend that MDH establish a formal policy and procedures, including the MDH is performing quarterly reconciliations for all programs to ensure that 7/31/2024 IAC/S is verifying that this recommendation has been completed.
appropriate procedural safeguards, to ensure that the critical quarterly reconciliations are amounts requested from the federal government through weekly drawdowns are
completed properly and timely, and reviewed and approved by a supervisor independent of agreed to actual expenditures. In response to this finding, MDH undertook a
the reconciliation process. process to fully document the reconciliation process, including review and
approval, in a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP). This was completed in
January 2023.

--- Page 4 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary – Status Report as of April 18, 2024
Finding 3 - MDH did not have procedures to ensure federal funds requested for
reimbursement of State payments were subsequently received.
We recommend that MDH establish a documented procedure to ensure that all federal MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in 6/30/2024
funds requested were received. identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the federal fund
accounting process. Through this engagement, MDH will develop documented In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
processes to ensure the receipt of requested federal funds. with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
vendor for updates on their progress.
Finding 4 - MDH did not have procedures to ensure all federal fund reimbursements
were properly allocated to the appropriate expenditure accounts resulting in a lack
of assurance that account balances were accurate and the inability to determine
whether all federal funds had been recovered.
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures and controls to ensure federal funds are allocated properly and MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in 6/30/2024 In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
timely, and that the related transactions are subject to supervisory review and approval; identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the federal fund with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
accounting process. Through this engagement, the Department will develop and vendor for updates on their progress.
document reconciliation procedures for proper allocation of federal fund
reimbursements to expenditure accounts.
b.ensure clearing accounts have either a positive or zero balance; MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in 6/30/2024
identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the federal fund
accounting process. Through this engagement, the Department will develop and
document reconciliation procedures for proper allocation of federal fund In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
reimbursements to expenditure accounts. with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
vendor for updates on their progress.
c. investigate and resolve the aforementioned account balances; and MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in 6/30/2024 In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the federal fund with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
accounting process. Through this engagement, the Department will document vendor for updates on their progress.
reconciliation procedures for the proper allocation of federal fund
reimbursements to expenditure accounts. Once that has occurred MDH will
investigate and resolve the account balances that OLA mentioned in their report.
d. given the magnitude of the year-end closing deficiencies noted in this and other MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in 6/30/2024 In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
findings, consider identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the federal fund with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
engaging a qualified third-party consultant to assist in the development of appropriate accounting process. Through this engagement, the Department will document vendor for updates on their progress.
corrective reconciliation procedures for proper allocation of federal fund reimbursement to
procedures and controls. expenditure accounts.
Finding 5 - MDH used an automated script to record year-end revenue entries
without verifying that the amounts recorded were valid and collectable.
We recommend that MDH

--- Page 5 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary – Status Report as of April 18, 2024
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported, MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in 6/30/2024 In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the federal fund with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
accounting process. Through this engagement, the Department will document vendor for updates on their progress.
reconciliation procedures for verification of the validity and collectability of year-
end automated revenue entries.
b. analyze the balances in the federal fund accounts to determine the collectability of any MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department 6/30/2024 In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
deficit balances and proper disposition of any surplus balances, and in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the vendor for updates on their progress.
Department will document reconciliation procedures for verification of
the validity and collectability of year-end automated revenue entries.
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work with DBM to MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in 6/30/2024 In progress - MDH has contracted with an external vendor to help
resolve any related deficits. identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the with the deliverable on these findings. Meet bi-weekly with the
federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the vendor for updates on their progress.
Department will document reconciliation procedures for verification of
the validity and collectability of year-end automated revenue entries.
Finding 6 - MDH used an emergency contract originally procured for COVID
related purposes for unrelated services without sufficient documentation that the
services were received and the related payments were proper. As a result, we could
not determine services were received or the propriety of MDH payments totaling
$60.4 million.
We recommend that MDH
a. conduct a review of this contract, which includes obtaining the detailed staffing MDH has initiated a review of this contract, including all modifications. 6/30/2024 IAC/S will be testing and validating these corrective actions.
information required by the contract, determine the extent of the services that were This review includes a detailed examination of selected invoices. For each Expected completion: 6/30/24
provided in relation to payments made, recover any payments determined to be improper, invoice, the review team will determine whether amounts charged,
and disclose this information to BPW; and including time charges for contract staff, were sufficiently documented
and can be associated with specific assigned work or deliverables.
Members of the review team were not associated with the contract and
will report findings directly to the MDH Secretary, who will determine
next steps, as appropriate.
b.ensure that future emergency contracts are procured and documented in accordance 6/30/2024 IAC/S will be testing and validating these corrective actions.
with State procurement regulations and are properly monitored to ensure services were Expected completion: 6/30/24
received and the related billings are adequately supported.
In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and
regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single
office - The Office of Contract Management and Procurement (OCMP).
This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight over all Department
procurement activities. This includes: ensuring all emergency procurement
files are full and complete; that we are procuring goods and services in
accordance with State procurement regulations; and properly monitoring
to ensure services were received and the related billings are adequately
supported.

--- Page 6 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary – Status Report as of April 18, 2024
Finding 7 - MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations when
procuring goods and services via sole source and emergency contracts and did not
always publish contract solicitations and awards as required.
We recommend that MDH ensure that
a. sufficient documented justifications exist for sole source (repeat) and emergency In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and 12/31/2024 3/15/24 - IAC/S will review and test as the standards and proceesses
procurements; regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single are completed.
office - OCMP. This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight
over all Department procurement activities, including ensuring sufficient
documented justifications exist for sole source and emergency
procurements. MDH continues to identify areas for improvement in
procurement and modify policies and procedures to ensure compliance
with State law.
b. documented price negotiations are conducted as appropriate (repeat); To ensure compliance with State procurement laws and 12/31/2024 3/15/24 - IAC/S will review and test as the standards and proceesses
regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single are completed.
office - OCMP. This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight
over all Department procurement activities, including ensuring price
negotiations occur and are appropriately documented as required. MDH
continues to identify areas for improvement in procurement and modify
policies and procedures to ensure compliance with State law.
c. BPW is notified of emergency procurements, including the one noted above (repeat); In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and 12/31/2024 3/15/24 - IAC/S will review and test as the standards and proceesses
and regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single are completed.
office - OCMP. This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight
over all Department procurement activities, including ensuring timely
notification to the Board of Public Works for any emergency
procurements conducted by the agency. MDH continues to identify areas
for improvement in procurement and modify policies and procedures to
ensure compliance with State law.
d. solicitations and awards are published on eMMA as required (repeat), including the In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and 12/31/2024
ones noted above. regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single
office - OCMP. This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight
over all Department procurement activities, including ensuring timely
publications of solicitations and awards on eMMA. MDH continues to
identify areas for improvement in procurement and modify policies and 3/15/24 - IAC/S will review and test as the standards and proceesses
procedures to ensure compliance with State law. are completed.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.

--- Page 7 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary – Status Report as of April 18, 2024
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Finding 13 - MDH was eight months behind on billing for services rendered at MDH
inpatient facilities, which based on MDH assertions could total approximately $45.4
million at the time of our review.
We recommend that MDH take formal action to address the backlog in unbilled services MDH took action to address the backlog in unbilled services as a result 6/30/2024 IAC/S review in progress
and ensure future services are billed in a timely manner. of the network security incident, as soon as HMIS was restored to the 03/06/24 – Initial email sent with requests for information and data.
network. Unfortunately, HMIS was not available or operational for the 8 03/07/24 – IAC/S and DBM met with Management to discuss the
months cited in OLA’s finding due to the network security incident. The findings and information received.
recovery team regularly maintained procedures to work with the billings Follow-up questions will be planned after discussions of the
team to create back billings as soon as HMIS was restored and documentation provided for review to determine completeness.
operational. In Progress - 6/30/24
Finding 14 - MDH had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of
biweekly payroll adjustments, leave balances, and timesheets.
We recommend that MDH
a. independently verify pay and leave balance adjustments to ensure that only authorized MDH has implemented a comprehensive verification process for 6/30/2024 3/16/24 - Interviewed and had a walkthrough of OHR new process.
adjustments have been processed and take appropriate corrective action when errors are employee pay and leave balance adjustments, which is documented in OHR has an SOP in place and IAC/S is reviewing and testing in
noted (repeat); SOPs/guidelines governing the review process. progress. 4/16/24 - Met with OHR and will begin testing soon.
Pay Adjustments: Managers within OHR’s Payroll and Timekeeping In Progress - 6/30/24
Unit review pay adjustments (inputs) submitted by MDH payroll
coordinators each week to ensure that they are accurately reviewed,
verified, and recorded and confirm that only authorized adjustments are
processed and paid. As required by DBM, payroll adjustments are
submitted by the payroll manager through an Input Request form. Input
Files are one-time fixed amounts that add to or reduce an employee's
gross payroll amount initiated by authorized time entry and
compensation change events in Workday. If pay adjustment errors are
noted during processing, the appropriate corrective actions are taken, to
include manual review of input forms, coordination of error resolution
with the assigned Payroll personnel, and final submission of inputs to
DBM.
Leave Balance Adjustments: OHR’s Payroll and Timekeeping Unit
instituted a leave adjustment review process to confirm the accuracy
and proper recording of leave adjustments to prevent and/or correct the
processing of unauthorized adjustments. If errors are noted upon
review, appropriate corrective actions are taken. OHR’s corrective and
preventative measures include an internal review and audit of a
randomized selection of 10% of records to ensure compliance with
leave adjustment standards.

--- Page 8 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary – Status Report as of April 18, 2024
b. retroactively verify that the time recorded on timesheets approved by payroll unit 6/30/2024 3/16/24 - Interviewed and had a walkthrough of OHR new process.
MDH has revised its timesheet certification process in response to this
employees were actually worked, including those noted above (repeat); and OHR has an SOP in place and IAC/S is reviewing and testing in
audit finding. The revised process outlines the review and verification
progress. 4/16/24 - Met with OHR and will begin testing soon.
procedures for merit and contractual timesheets that are approved by
In Progress - 6/30/24
OHR’s timekeepers. After the identification of timesheets submitted by
MDH’s timekeepers (due to missing initial entries), OHR obtains email
confirmation from supervisors of missing timesheet information. This
process is completed weekly on Thursdays by assigned Payroll
personnel at the conclusion of the Office’s weekly standard payroll
activities. Two weeks after the initial email, the assigned payroll
personnel reports to the Chief of payroll those supervisors who have yet
to confirm entries approved by OHR timekeepers. The Chief sends out
follow-up emails to each supervisor to complete the certification
process.
c. reconcile total payroll as reflected in CPB payroll registers each pay period with SPS 6/30/2024 3/16/24 - Interviewed and had a walkthrough of OHR new process.
MDH has revised its processes in response to this finding. The biweekly
payroll summary reports, investigate any differences, and ensure that those reconciliations OHR has an SOP in place and IAC/S is reviewing and testing in
payroll reconciliation process instituted by OHR requires the
are documented (repeat). progress. 4/16/24 - Met with OHR and will begin testing soon.
comparison of SPMS Payroll Summary Reports in Workday to the
In Progress - 6/30/24
Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) Payroll Register. The assigned Payroll
personnel completes a review for discrepancies between the reports to
identify incorrect data. Upon the completion of the initial review,
discrepancies are addressed by reviewing internal reports, Workday
transactions, timesheets, and the Payroll Online Service Center (POSC)
to identify dissimilar data. Once the erroneous result is correctly
identified, the necessary corrections are made by the assigned Payroll
personnel. The results and corrections are documented on the SPS
Payroll Summary and CPB Payroll Register that is maintained in the
OHR Payroll Manager shared files.
Finding 15 - MDH did not have procedures to ensure that employees who were
terminated or left State service were promptly removed from the payroll, resulting in
improper payments to at least 45 former employees totaling $151,000.
We recommend that MDH
a. implement procedures to ensure timely posting in SPS of employees who are MDH has identified areas of opportunity for additional knowledge 6/30/2024 3/16/24 - Interviewed and had a walkthrough of OHR new process.
terminated or leave State service; and transfer for supervisory and managerial employees as it relates to timely OHR has an SOP in place and IAC/S is reviewing and testing in
and efficient notification of impending employee terminations and progress. 4/16/24 - Met with OHR and will begin testing soon.
resignations. This includes additional information on protocol and In Progress - 6/30/24
procedure, as well as the centralization of HR resources for ease of
access and usage for those who need it. Further, MDH will optimize
report usage to create an alternative means of finding instances of
employees no longer working with the agency. This includes more
effective and proactive usage of various available reporting tools (SPMS
No Time Entered and Less the 80 Report) to proactively identify and
address potential areas of concern. This should create a significant
reduction in instances of the need for backdated or processing delayed
termination in SPS Workday.

--- Page 9 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary – Status Report as of April 18, 2024
b. investigate payments to employees after they left State service, including those noted MDH is modifying its processes to address this finding. OHR will utilize 6/30/2024 3/16/24 - Interviewed and had a walkthrough of OHR new process.
above, and in consultation with legal counsel pursue recovery of any improper payments termination reports to audit the same time period assessed by the audit OHR has an SOP in place and IAC/S is reviewing and testing in
as deemed appropriate. team (beginning February 2019) and extend it to the end of fiscal year progress. 4/16/24 - Met with OHR and will begin testing soon.
2023 to identify those employees, both during the audited time frame In Progress - 6/30/24
and beyond, who may have been terminated with a backdated effective
date. Using this list, all identified employees’ records will be further audited to
identify any potential improper payments and undergo what
corrective action can be taken to resolve the issue. Moving forward from
7/1/2023, the above-noted measures will be implemented to mitigate any
further potential occurrences of this issue.
Finding 16 - MDH did not sufficiently control collections including the untimely 03/06/24 – Initial email sent with requests for information and data.
endorsement and deposit of collections, a lack of independent verification that 03/07/24 – IAC/S and DBM met with Management to discuss the
collections were deposited, and a failure to require large payments to be submitted findings and information received.
electronically. Follow-up questions will be planned after discussions of the
documentation provided for review to determine completeness.
Will also request a walkthrough to observe the collections process.
In Progress - 6/30/24.
We recommend that MDH
a. restrictively endorse collections immediately upon receipt, MDH has implemented a procedure for restrictively endorsing 6/30/2024 In Progress - 6/30/24
collections immediately upon receipt. MDH has updated written
procedures accordingly.
b. deposit collections within one business day of receipt, MDH has implemented this recommendation and has updated written 6/30/2024 In Progress - 6/30/24
procedures accordingly.
c. ensure that independent deposit verifications are documented for all collections, and MDH resumed independent deposit verifications in July 2022 by having 6/30/2024 In Progress - 6/30/24
a staff member review and attach the Previous Day Composite Report to
the daily deposit.
d. consider requiring large payments to be made electronically to enhance control over the MDH will study this issue and prepare a documented analysis. We 6/30/2024 IAC/S will be testing and validating these corrective actions.
funds. caution, however, that the use of electronic ACH transfers could create Expected completion: 6/30/24
confusion and complicate reconciliation of expenditures to revenues.
Finding 17 - MDH did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were
implemented to address prior findings from our Office’s fiscal compliance audits of
the other MDH units.
We recommend that MDH ensure that appropriate correction actions are implemented to MDH has engaged an outside accounting firm to help MDH address prior audit 12/31/2024 12/31/24 - In Progress
address Office of Legislative Audits report findings. findings made by OLA, including those identified in this report, and recent
reports on Medicaid, DDA, and the 2022 closeout audit. MDH is also actively
recruiting and filling vacancies. The additional resources will assist with
reconciliation of the data between FMIS, MMIS, PCIS2, any other related
external systems. MDH is also exploring hiring recent retirees to support our
fiscal staff with training and best practices.
In addition, MDH meets regularly with DBM to review and evaluate ongoing
corrective actions addressing prior OLA findings. These meetings will continue
until all identified actions are deemed complete.
**IAC/S works cooperatively with DBM's Audit & Finance Compliance Unit