Title: Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration - Follow-up Review Status
Date: 05/07/2024
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663ce861ff1f3f431bffd57b
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:15:21.151133
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 7, 2024
Re: Audit of Maryland Department of Health –
Medical Care Programs Administration
Report Date: November 2, 2023
The Honorable Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
201 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Secretary Herrera Scott:
Our November 2, 2023 audit report of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) –
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) determined that MCPA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, based on our rating system. The rating system was
established, in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1221, of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, for the purpose of determining an overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal
accountability and compliance with State laws and regulations. In accordance with a policy
approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee, the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA)
performs a follow-up review of the status of the findings contained in any audit report that is
rated unsatisfactory.
To that end, in March 2024 we requested an implementation status from MDH for the
findings included in the report in conjunction with the aforementioned policy. In response to
our request, MDH’s Office of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance and Information Security
(IAC/S) on behalf of MCPA, provided a status report, as of April 12, 2024.
This public letter differs from the confidential letter previously provided to you, as
detailed information in MDH’s status report deemed to be cybersecurity-related has been
redacted in accordance with State Government Article Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code
of Maryland.
The status report indicated that MDH estimated that the implementation of the necessary
corrective actions for the eight non-cybersecurity-related findings would occur between June 30,

--- Page 2 ---
The Honorable Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., -2- May 7, 2024
Secretary
2024 and July 1, 2025. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the current status of the two
cybersecurity findings from this public copy of the letter.
Based on the current status reported by MDH’s IAC/S, OLA does not believe it would be
an effective or efficient use of our resources to conduct a follow up review of the referenced
MCPA audit report at this time. A copy of the aforementioned status report relating to the non-
cybersecurity findings for MCPA is attached. OLA will request an updated status report from
MDH in August 2024 and, based on the MDH implementation status contained therein, we will
assess the practicality of conducting a follow-up at that time.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair, Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair, House Appropriations Committee
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Ryan B. Moran, Dr.P.H., Deputy Secretary Health Care Financing & Medicaid Director,
MDH
Tricia C. Roddy, Deputy Medicaid Director, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
Secretary Katie Olson Savage, Department of Information Technology
Greg S. Rogers, State Chief Information Security Officer, Department of Information
Technology
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration – Status Report as of April 12, 2024
MCPA Primary Audit
Audit Period - August 1, 2018 to March 31, 2022
IAC/S Audit Follow-up
Findings
Recommendations
Repeats
Finding/Recommendation Responses Estimated IAC/S Comments
Completion Date as
of April 12, 2024
Finding 1 - The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not ensure that all referrals of potential
third-party health insurance information were investigated and recorded in the Medicaid Management
Information System (MMIS II), which could result in MCPA improperly paying claims that should have been
paid by a third party.
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. all third-party health insurance information provided by its third-party liability vendor are interfaced with MMIS II, MDH is actively working on a plan of correction with a third party liability vendor and information technology staff 12/31/2024In progress. IAC/S will review upon completion.
and to address the carrier text file interface. MCPA staff requested and received a master code file that was reviewed and
sorted before being sent to the vendor for additional reviews. Any data discrepancies will be reconciled. MCPA staff
have also requested a master file of codes that the vendor utilizes to have them added to the system. When the file is
updated, MDH will conduct testing to ensure the interface is working as expected.
b. all MCO insurance referrals are recorded into MMIS II timely (repeat). MCPA has hired and trained three contractual employees to address this 6/30/2024In progress. IAC/S will review upon completion.
finding. The backlog for 2019-2021 has been addressed, and the 2022
backlog was resolved by September 30, 2023. Continued progress on
automating the referral process using the 270/271 format should resume
once the carrier code file referenced above is resolved.
Finding 2 - MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover questionable Medicaid
payments, including $7.1 million in payments on behalf of incarcerated and deceased recipients.
We recommend that MCPA establish effective processes over questionable Medicaid payments. Specifically, MCPA
should
a. ensure that instances of recipients with missing SSNs are referred to DHS and the LHDs for investigation; Once the security incident was resolved, MDH resumed the review 6/30/2024In progress: IAC/S is developing a testing methodology.
process. MCPA completed a comprehensive review of recipient cases
with missing SSNs prior to the system incident. MCPA is now
reviewing the missing SSN cases on a monthly cycle, and cases are
being sent to the local health departments and the Department of Human Services for corrective action.
MCPA continues to monitor the corrective action cases on a monthly basis.
b. sufficiently document its reviews of investigations of questionable recipient eligibility (including instances of Once the security incident was resolved, MCPA began implementing a 7/1/2025In progress. IAC/S is reviewing the workaround process developed by Medicaid.
recipients missing SSNs or receiving Medicaid benefits in other states) to support that proper corrective action was workaround process. MCPA will utilize a standalone platform that will
taken (repeat); be implemented in March 2024 and will allow document reviews of
investigations of questionable recipient eligibility to support that proper
corrective action is taken timely.
c. establish a process to identify, prevent, and recover improper fee-for service payments related to incarcerated Since the last audit, MDH has continued to improve efforts to identify 6/30/2024In progress - IAC/S is working with Medicaid to develop a testing methodology.
recipients; and and prevent questionable Medicaid payments on behalf of incarcerated
recipients by adding a weekly manual review process of near-matches
for DOB and SSN. Moreover, MCPA is actively working with DPSCS to
receive comprehensive incarceration data to accurately identify all
incarcerated recipients. The ability to prevent improper fee-for-service
payments related to incarcerated recipients remains challenging for the
current MMIS infrastructure. MDH is the process of procuring a new
modular MMIS. Therefore, the ability to identify, prevent, and recover
Fee For Service payments to incarcerated individuals can be
incorporated into the requirements for the new claims and /or eligibility
modules.

--- Page 4 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration – Status Report as of April 12, 2024
d. document its efforts to identify and remove deceased recipients from Medicaid and to investigate and pursue the MCPA runs the Death Match Report monthly and shares it with DHS, 8/1/2024In progress. IAC/S is working with Medicaid to develop a methodology for testing Medicaid's
recovery of improper payments after the recipients’ dates of death, including those noted in the analysis. which investigates and initiates the closing in the system of record. investigation of potentially improper claims.
Monthly, MCPA reviews a sample of cases. Cases needing to be closed
are sent to DHS and the Local Departments of Health to initiate closing.
MCPA monitors the corrective action plans monthly to ensure the
closings are initiated. The process was stopped during the security
incident but resumed on 07/2022.
Additionally, due to the Public Health Emergency, the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services would not allow MCPA to close cases on
households where the primary household member was deceased, as it
would close the entire household. Redeterminations on these households
have recommenced, and the primary deceased member is being removed
from the household at their redetermination.
Of the 15 cases that OLA identified that were deceased prior to medical
services being rendered or capitation payments made on behalf of the consumer,
MCPA determined two of the consumers remain alive and
active. One case was unable to be closed because there was a minor child
in the household and per COVID-19 Public Health Emergency rules, the
case was required to remain active. This case is marked for further
review during the household’s next renewal cycle. 12 cases were found
to be deceased and to date, all payments made after the consumer’s date
of date have been successfully recouped.
Finding 3 - MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid eligibility information were processed
timely and accurately.
We recommend that MCPA
ensure recipient eligibility information is updated timely and accurately, and that errors to recipient eligibility MCPA experienced work stoppage due to significant system disruptions, which were caused by the MDH security 1/31/2025In progress - 03/11/24 - Initial email sent with requests for information and data relating to
information in MMIS II are corrected. incident on 12/4/21. During the security incident, MCPA was not able to complete normal operations and was finding 3 recommendations. IAC/S will work with Medicaid to develop a testing methodology.
without system access until April 2022, at which time the certification turnaround document (CTAD) review 04/04/24 - Responses received from initial requests for information to review.
resumed. MCPA will continue to ensure recipient eligibility information in MMIS is updated timely, and that errors
to recipient eligibility information in MMIS II are updated to reflect current recipient statuses. Additionally, MCPA
has developed remote working protocols that will allow staff to continue conducting Medicaid services and reviews
during adverse working conditions. MCPA continues to work under Standard Operating Procedure #18-07, Revised
7/16/2021, to detail the process for reporting and processing CTADs. To determine that CTADs are completed
accurately, management is responsible for reviewing and evaluating a minimum of 20 case samples each month.
Additionally, reports are used in the Division of Recipient Eligibility Programs (DREP) to track the number of
CTAD documents sent to the unit and processed on a monthly basis.
Finding 4 - MCPA had not established adequate oversight to ensure that all CFC program recipients received
personal assistance services in accordance with their plans of services.
We recommend that MCPA
a. establish a process to ensure that all CFC recipients are monitored by nurses (repeat), and This finding is specific to CFC participants who are receiving personal assistance services and are therefore required 6/30/2024In Progress - IAC/S is working in collaboration with DBM.
to also receive nurse monitoring at the minimum frequency noted in COMAR 10.09.84.20 (twice annually, with at 01/12/24 – DBM sent an initial email with requests for information and data.
least one in-person visit). MCPA has established a process to ensure that eligible participants receive the nurse 01/19/24 – Responses received to initial requests.
monitoring service at the minimum frequency. As of October 2023, approximately five percent of eligible
participants had not received the service, which was a significant decrease from the previous audit findings released 03/21/24 -In person meeting scheduled at 3:30pm with OLTSS to discuss current status of
in 2019. Since the time of the original finding, MCPA developed and a Nurse Monitoring Agreement, which recommendations. 03/26/24 - Received unsigned copy of Nurse Monitoring Agreement for
establishes clear standards for the service, its delivery, and its continuous monitoring both the Local Health review. 4 LHDs were remaining to sign the Agreement, expected completion date 03/31/24.
Departments (LHDs) providing nurse monitoring and MCPA. Medicaid leadership met with the Health Officers on IAC/S will need to follow up and request a copy of the signed and executed Nurse Monitoring
January 10, 2024 to review the Nursing Monitor Agreement, which is expected to by signed by the Health Officer Agreement.
for each local jurisdiction by January 31, 2024. Since the original finding, new tools were also developed and
implemented in the Department’s data management system, LTSSMaryland, to focus specifically on the population
of participants that had not received the service of nurse monitoring, despite being eligible.

--- Page 5 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration – Status Report as of April 12, 2024
b. develop a plan to address the longstanding instances of non-compliance for the aforementioned LHD. The Nurse Monitoring Agreement, written in collaboration with the 6/30/2024In Progress
LHDs, is expected to be signed by the Health Officer in each jurisdiction by January 31, 2024. The LHDs are 01/12/24 – Team sent an initial email with requests for information and data.
currently following the standards established in the Agreement while the 01/19/24 – Responses received to initial requests.
Department is pursuing signed agreements from all LHDs. 03/11/24 - Email sent to request availability for an in-person meeting to discuss the status of
finding. Expected completion of IAC/S review: 4/30/2024.
03/21/24 - In person meeting scheduled at 3:30pm with OLTSS to discuss current status of
recommendations. 03/26/24 - IAC/S received documentation for review. Will need to fully
review to follow up and determine any additional information needed.
Finding 5 - MCPA did not monitor the utilization control agent contractor to ensure continued stay reviews of
Medicaid recipients receiving services from nursing facilities were performed timely.
We recommend that MCPA
monitor the UCA vendor to ensure CSRs are performed timely and assess liquidated damages as permitted by the MCPA agrees with the recommendation and will continue to monitor the UCA vendor. A three-point plan was 6/30/2024In Progress
contract (repeat). developed to improve CSR timeliness and completion has been in place since 2019. Specifically, MCPA developed 2/8/24 - Met with contract monitor to discuss this finding. Contract Monitor has concerns that
improved approaches for assuring CSRs get completed by the UCA, scheduled joint (UCA & MCPA) meetings because data is everchanging it will be difficult to ensure all CSRs are performed.
resulting in a revised standard operating procedure, and wrote more targeted and active approaches to CSRs into the 3/5/24 - Reviewed work papers from OLA to determine the validity of the findings. Noted the
RFP for the next UCA to prevent similar issues under future procurements. The new contract with these approaches data match performed and sample testing performed by contract monitor under the request of
was awarded in June 2023 and its operations will begin in 2024. OLA. 12 of 15 items tested did not have the required CSR performed. Based on this it appears
OLAs results are accurate. We may be able to use this data match to attempt to reconcile with
monthly invoices from the vendor.
3/11/24 - Met with agency staff to discuss w/ps reviewed from OLA. Agency staff agreed an AD-
Hoc report could be run out of MMIS to compare data but wanted to double check the
parameters the of request OLA made to ensure the data would match. IAC/S will work with
Medicaid to ensure the new report satisfies the intent of the recommendation. IAC/S expected
completion date: 4/30/2024
4/8/24- Requested update on when Ad Hoc report will be completed. Staff has created
parameters for Ad Hoc Report but has not submitted them to IT as of yet.
Finding 6 - MCPA did not have an established process to ensure costly recipient ventilator care claims submitted
by nursing facilities were valid, as required by State regulations.
We recommend that MCPA
establish procedures to periodically validate ventilator care claims submitted by nursing facilities, as required by State MCPA agrees that ventilator audits should be conducted, and 6/30/2024In progress. 3/11/24 - Met with agency personnel and requested SOP and the most recent audit
regulations, and recoup any claim payments that are determined to be unsupported or improper (repeat). recoupment should occur for any claims that are unsupported. The UCA performed by the team. 3/18/2024 - received SOP and example of process. IAC/S is reviewing
will begin conducting these audits in early to mid-2024. As a short-term this documentation. Expected completion of IAC/S review is 4/15/2024.
solution, the Department began conducting ventilator audits internally in 3/14/24- Reviewed SOP and determined that it needs to be more comprehensive including
September 2023. specific metrics for pass/fail and the requirement of a CAP from the facility.
Upon the prior finding, MCPA wrote the ventilator audit process into the 4/1/24- Met with unit staff to discuss SOP and the unit agrees to update SOP. A List of audit
new requirements for the UCA contract. The award for the new contract schedulesle was provided and discovered only 3 of 19 reviews of CY22 have been completed.
was announced in June 2023 and is currently undergoing These are expected to be done prior to vendor taking over in Fall of 2024. We will test the 3
implementation; operations are due to begin in early 2024. facilities to determine compliance.
Finding 7 - MCPA did not conduct the required audits of Medical Day Care (MDC) and Supports Planning
providers, and the related audit policy and procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive.
We recommend that MCPA
a. audit MDC providers (repeat) and Supports Planning providers in accordance with its policy; MDH agrees with this finding. Unfortunately, longstanding staff attrition and insufficient resource capacity 12/31/2024MDC audits are ongoing and the first audits of 2024 are complete. IAC/S requested an SOP and
challenges, in addition to prioritizing program operations during the COVID-19 public health emergency resulted in audit example on 3/11/24.
a delay in annual audits. The next steps related to specific audits are as follows: Supports Planning Providers - The 3/14/24: SOP received and appears sufficient.
next annual audit of the 27 Supports Planning Agencies will commence on January 1, 2024, and will conclude on or 3/18/24: Met with staff to discuss SOP and walkthrough example provided. Th examples appear
before December 31, 2024. MCPA will ensure that annual audits are conducted each year thereafter in accordance sufficient.
with its policy. MDC Audits - Identical to the aforementioned challenges, the MDC program will leverage next 4/8/24: Test items selected for Test of MDC audits.
year’s schedule of audits to ensure each provider is audited for compliance. 4/10/24: DBMs review of all audits showed that 11 audits since 2018 did not have CAPS
submitted within 10 days as required.

--- Page 6 ---
Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration – Status Report as of April 12, 2024
b. ensure that all MDC provider claims since the previous audit are subject to testing (repeat); and Supports Planning Agency (SPA) - Review of submitted claims is included in the annual audit process. MCPA will 12/31/2024In progress: 3/19/2024 - IAC/S received SOP from Medicaid. IAC/S will review and test.
ensure that claims are tested during the next audit cycle and thereafter. The audit timeframe will be clearly
documented to help prevent an overlap in claims testing or any associated data integrity issues. MDC - The MDC
Program has updated its auditing tool to require all auditing staff document the time period of the previous
attendance audit and resume attendance auditing from that period to ensure no time periods are skipped or missed
while auditing each provider. The standard operating procedure (SOP) was also updated. The MDC team has
received updated training and will continue to engage in monthly audit meetings to ensure competency and employ
standardization among staff, reinforce best practices, discuss findings, auditing progress, technical assistance, and
any other feedback from the team.
c. enhance its MDC audit policy to establish audit scope requirements and testing methodology, including a Since this audit, the MDC program established an SOP that directs an expansion of audits (i.e., extrapolation) based 6/30/2024In progress: 3/19/2024 - IAC/S received SOP from Medicaid. IAC/S will review and test.
requirement to expand audit testing when significant deficiencies are identified (repeat). on specific deficiencies (e.g., instances or trends of noncompliance with requisite attendance and reimbursement
policies). Findings, risk controls, mitigation strategies, and best practices are discussed during audit meetings.
Finding 8 - MCPA did not adequately monitor the hospital claims audit contractor and had not collected or
recovered improper claims identified by the contractor totaling $6.9 million.
We recommend that MCPA
a. adequately monitor the hospital claims audit contractor, including obtaining all deliverables as required by the MDH has a report that includes recommendations from the vendor for reducing and preventing improper payments 6/30/2024IAC/S will meet with OIGH to review and develop a testing plan to validate Medicaid's
contract; and issued on claims and establishing a criterion for identifying error prone providers for heightened scrutiny. In corrective actions.
addition, the Department has recovered overpayments identified by the contractor. The Department has already set
up regular monthly meetings with the hospital audit contractor, with one quarterly meeting to include the Office of
Inspector General for Health.
b. pursue recovery of overpaid claims identified by the audit contractor in a timely manner. Once the security incident was resolved MCPA recouped these payments 6/30/2024In progress: IAC/S will meet with Medicaid to develop a testing plan regarding the
in full. recoupments.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.