Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Office of the Comptroller - Bureau of Revenue Estimates - Field Enforcement Bureau
Date: 05/06/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663ce731ff1f3f431bff6585
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:15:04.303880
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Office of the Comptroller
Bureau of Revenue Estimates
Field Enforcement Bureau
May 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shetty L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 6, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Office of the Comptroller (OOC) and the Bureau of Revenue Estimates
(BRE) for the period beginning January 22, 2019 and ending March 15, 2023, and
the Field Enforcement Bureau (FEB) for the period beginning January 1, 2021
and ending March 15, 2023 (collectively referred to as the Office). The OOC aids
the COM in the general supervision of State fiscal affairs; provides certain
support services for COM’s divisions (including database operations), the Board
of Public Works, and the Registers of Wills; maintains accounting records for the
State’s general obligation debt; and administers the State’s capital grants program.
The BRE studies and analyzes State revenue sources and periodically prepares
estimates of State revenues. FEB is responsible for the enforcement of trade
practice regulations and revenue laws related to motor fuel and sales and use tax,
for monitoring and enforcing the use of business licenses, and for testing motor
fuel quality.
Our audit disclosed that OOC did not publish 40 contract awards totaling $138.4
million on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required by State procurement
laws.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in

--- Page 4 ---
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendation.
COM’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of COM’s
response related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by OOC,
BRE, and FEB. We also wish to acknowledge COM’s willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
This audit includes the activities of the Comptroller of Maryland (COM) - Office
of the Comptroller (OOC), Bureau of Revenue Estimates (BRE), and the newly
established Field Enforcement Bureau (FEB).
• OOC maintains the accounting records for the State’s general obligation debt
and administers the State’s capital grants program and provides certain
support services to other COM divisions and the Board of Public Works.
State law also assigns the OOC budgetary responsibility for the State’s 24
elected Registers of Wills (ROW). The OOC’s budgetary responsibility for
ROWs is limited to setting the number of the assistant clerks or deputy
registers and related salaries and increasing the salary of each nonelected
employee consistent with increases granted to State employees. In addition, a
unit within OOC is responsible for operating a database utilized by other
COM divisions, including BRE. Finally, the OOC is also responsible for
providing guidance to the ROWs regarding fiscal policies, approving certain
procurements, providing input on personnel matters, and for providing certain
support services.
• BRE studies and analyzes State revenue sources and periodically prepares
estimates of State revenues.
• FEB is responsible for the enforcement of trade practice regulations and
revenue laws related to motor fuel and sales and use taxes, for monitoring and
enforcing the use of business licenses, and for testing motor fuel quality.
According to the State’s records, the expenditures for the OOC, BRE, and FEB
totaled approximately $19.6 million during fiscal year 2022 (see Figure 1 on the
following page). According to the OOC’s records, capital grant expenditures
totaled $51.3 million during fiscal year 2022.
Our office conducts separate fiscal compliance audits of other COM divisions. A
listing of the most recent fiscal compliance audits of COM divisions performed
during the current audit cycle can be found in Exhibit 1 of this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
OOC, BRE, and FEB
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 104 90.4%
Vacant 11 9.6%
Total 115
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $13,811,882 70.3%
Technical and Special Fees 63,680 0.3%
Operating Expenses 5,764,872 29.4%
Total $19,640,434
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $10,727,851 54.6%
Special Fund 5,602,906 28.5%
Federal Fund 18,990 0.1%
Reimbursable Fund 3,290,687 16.8%
Total $19,640,434
Source: State financial and personnel records
Organizational Change
Prior to January 1, 2021, COM’s Field Enforcement Division (FED) was
responsible for the enforcement of trade practice regulations and revenue laws
related to alcoholic beverages, tobacco, motor fuel, and sales and use taxes.
Additionally, FED was responsible for monitoring and enforcing the use of
business licenses and for testing motor fuel quality. Effective January 1, 2021,
authority to enforce the State’s laws concerning alcoholic beverages and tobacco
products was transferred, by law, to the newly established Alcohol and Tobacco
Commission (ATC)1. All other authority and responsibilities of FED remain with
1 Effective May 3, 2023, Chapter 255, Laws of Maryland 2023 renamed the Alcohol and Tobacco
Commission as the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission.
4

--- Page 7 ---
the Comptroller, although the name of FED was effectively changed at that time
to the Field Enforcement Bureau (FEB).
Our final audit report on FED was issued on September 7, 2021. This report
contained a finding that will be followed up on during our subsequent separate
audit of the ATC, which has yet to be conducted. FEB was currently, and will be
in the future, subject to audit during our audit of OOC.
Findings and Recommendations
Publishing of Contract Awards
Finding 1
The Office of the Comptroller (OOC) did not publish 40 contract awards
totaling $138.4 million on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as
required.
Analysis
OOC did not publish numerous contract awards on eMMA2 as required by State
procurement laws. We tested 50 contracts totaling $194.6 million awarded during
the period from January 2019 to January 2023. Our test disclosed that, as of
March 2023, the OOC had not published 40 of the awards totaling $138.4 million
on eMMA even though they had been awarded 2 to 46 months prior to that date.
The aforementioned 40 awards included 25 designated by OOC as sole source
procurements. State procurement laws require awards for contracts greater than
$50,000 and all contracts identified as sole source to be published on eMMA not
more than 30 days after award of the contract. Publishing awards on eMMA
provides transparency over State procurements, including information about
winning bidders and the amount of the related awards.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OOC
a. comply with State procurement laws by publishing contract awards on
eMMA within 30 days of the contract award, and
b. publish the aforementioned awards on eMMA.
2 eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) is an internet-based, interactive procurement system
managed by the Department of General Services. Effective July 2019, DGS replaced eMaryland
Marketplace with eMMA.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 2 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the following finding, including the
analysis, related recommendation(s), along with COM’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Office of the Comptroller (OOC) and the Bureau of Revenue Estimates
(BRE) for the period beginning January 22, 2019 and ending March 15, 2023, and
the Field Enforcement Bureau (FEB) for the period beginning January 1, 2021
and ending March 15, 2023 (collectively referred to as the Office).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included capital grants monitoring, procurements and
disbursements, information systems security and control, and certain human
resource activity for payroll. Our audit included various support services (such as
processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, human resources, and
related fiscal functions) provided by OOC to the other divisions of the COM, the
6

--- Page 9 ---
Board of Public Works, and the Registers of Wills located in Maryland’s 24
subdivisions.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Office by COM
– Central Payroll Bureau (CPB). These support services (payroll processing) are
included in the scope of our audit of CPB. Our audit also did not include certain
support services provided to the Office by COM – Information Technology
Division (ITD) related to the monitoring of information technology equipment
and services. These support services are included in the scope of our audits of
ITD.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 22, 2019 to March 15, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. An additional finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion
in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
8

--- Page 11 ---
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of this cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to COM and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from COM, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise COM
regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions
As of March 2024
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
• Processing, evaluating, verifying, and recording tax
Revenue Administration data as reported by taxpayers and other parties
1 01/22/24
Division • Collection of tax receipts
• Distribution of tax refunds
• Management of the State payroll system
• Non-budgeted funds maintained for payroll deductions
2 Central Payroll Bureau • Critical information systems 10/05/23
• Support services to other divisions of the Comptroller
for processing payroll timekeeping records
• Procurement
• Equipment
Information Technology • Support services to other divisions of the Comptroller
3 09/07/21
Division (Fiscal Operations) for monitoring information technology related services
and maintaining information technology equipment
inventory records
• Confiscated property
Field Enforcement Bureau
4 • Business licenses 09/07/21
(FEB)3
• Routine inspections
• Investigations, collection of delinquent taxes, and other
taxpayer compliance activities related to individual
income taxes
• Audits and investigations, collection of delinquent
5 Compliance Division 12/09/20
taxes, and other taxpayer compliance activities related
to business taxes
• Identification, collection, and distribution of unclaimed
property
• State agency vendor payment processing
• Vendor table maintenance
6 General Accounting Division 11/09/20
• State agency working funds
• Corporate purchasing card program
Information Technology • Maintenance and monitoring of mainframe operating
7 Division – Annapolis Data system, various security functions, and critical 07/27/20
Center Operations databases
3 As a result of an organizational change previously referenced on page 5, a separate audit of FEB
will no longer be conducted.
10

--- Page 13 ---
APPENDIX
Brooke E. Lierman
Comptroller
Wayne P. Green, CPA
Director
Administration & Finance
April 17, 2024
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed is the Comptroller’s response to your report on the Office of the Comptroller for the period
beginning January 22, 2019 and ending March 15, 2023.
We have carefully reviewed each finding, and we believe that our responses fully address each
recommendation contained in the report. Should you need additional information or clarification, please
contact David Hildebrand, Director, Office of Risk Management by email at dhildebr@marylandtaxes.gov
or by telephone at 410-260-7768.
The Comptroller appreciates your objective appraisal of our operations and your recommendations for
continuous improvement and commends your auditors for their professionalism and thorough review.
Sincerely,
Rianna Matthews-Brown
Chief of Staff
Wayne P. Green
Director, Administration and Finance
Cc: Honorable Brooke Elizabeth Lierman, Comptroller
80 Calvert Street Annapolis, Maryland 21401 1-800-552-3941 (MD) Maryland Relay 711
TTY 410-260-7157 wgreen@marylandtaxes.gov 410-260-7445 Fax: 410-974-2737

--- Page 14 ---
Comptroller of Maryland - Office of the Comptroller - Bureau of
Revenue Estimates - Field Enforcement Bureau
Agency Response Form
Publishing of Contract Awards
Finding 1
The Office of the Comptroller (OOC) did not publish 40 contract awards
totaling $138.4 million on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as
required.
We recommend that OOC
a. comply with State procurement laws by publishing contract awards on
eMMA within 30 days of the contract award, and
b. publish the aforementioned awards on eMMA.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: September 2023
Please provide details of A comprehensive checklist has been established to ensure all contract
corrective action or awards are published as required. Many of the contracts noted were
explain disagreement. awarded during the pandemic when the goal was to procure necessary and
critical goods/services with limited available staff. Unfortunately, this
final step was not performed in the required time frame. All missing
award publications have been identified and published in compliance with
State procurement laws and regulations.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: September 2023
Please provide details of The awards have been posted to eMMA.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 15 ---
Comptroller of Maryland - Office of the Comptroller - Bureau of
Revenue Estimates - Field Enforcement Bureau
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 2
related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore
is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance
with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the
finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with COM’s
responses have been redacted from this report copy, COM’s responses
indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 16 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Tari J. Covington
Staff Auditor
Joshua A. Nicodemus
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors