Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Human Services - Family Investment Administration to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2023 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 05/14/2024
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6643cead2772ae874ff7112b
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:06:18.801522
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 14, 2024
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the
Department of Human Services (DHS) Family Investment Administration (FIA) to resolve the
repeat findings in our October 21, 2022 audit report. This review was conducted in accordance
with a requirement specified in the April 2023 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page 148. The
JCR required that, prior to the release of $100,000 of its administrative appropriation for fiscal
year 2024, DHS must take corrective action on all repeat audit findings on or before November
1, 2023. The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget committees
listing each repeat audit finding along with a determination that each repeat finding was
corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget
committees to review and release the funds prior to the end of the fiscal year.
The October 21, 2022 audit report of FIA contained five repeat audit findings (findings 2,
6, 7, 9, and 10) that were addressed by eight recommendations. In accordance with the April
2023 JCR requirement, FIA provided a status report to OLA, dated December 4, 2023, detailing
certain corrective actions that had been completed and actions that were ongoing with respect to
all five repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1). The FIA status report indicated that corrective actions
had been completed for two of the five findings.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- May 14, 2024
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
We reviewed the FIA status report and related documentation, performed limited tests
and analyses of the information, and held discussions with FIA personnel as necessary to assess
the implementation status of the related recommendations. Our review did not constitute an
audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Based on our current review, we determined that FIA resolved Finding 2, but had not yet
taken sufficient actions to correct Findings 6, 7, 9, and 10. Specifically, although FIA had
implemented certain elements of the recommendations related to Findings 6, 7, 9, and 10 the
actions to date did not address the entirety of the findings (Exhibit 2). Consequently, at the time
of our review, our assessment of Findings 6, 7, 9, and 10 concluded that they were still in
progress as of November 2023 (Exhibit 3).
Although we concluded that those aforementioned findings had not been fully resolved,
Exhibit 3 does provide additional detail regarding certain corrective actions that had been taken
to date. We discussed our findings with FIA management. We trust our response satisfactorily
addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Rafael J. Lopez, DHS
Carnitra D. White, Principal Deputy Secretary, DHS
Daniel W. Wait, Deputy Secretary of Operations, DHS
Kirill Reznik, Acting Chief Financial Officer, DHS
Webster Ye, Chief of Staff, DHS
Augustin Ntabaganyimana, Acting Executive Director, FIA

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- May 14, 2024
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Marva M. Sutherland, Inspector General, DHS
Shelly-Ann Dyer, Assistant Inspector General, DHS
William C. Niner, Director, Bureau of Audit Compliance & Reporting, FIA
Tonya D. Zimmerman, Manager, Department of Legislative Services
Joan M. Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget and
Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
January3,2024
Mr.GregoryA.Hook,CPA
LegislativeAuditor
OfficeofLegislativeAudits
TheWarehouseatCamdenYards,
351WestCamdenStreet,Suite400
Baltimore,Maryland21201
DearMr.Hook:
In response to your letter dated November 9,2023,weareprovidingtheenclosedstatusreportdetailing
the corrective actions that have been taken with respect to the findings noted in the October 2022
DepartmentofHumanServices–FamilyInvestmentAdministration(FIA)auditreport.
The Department takes audit findings seriously andiscommittedtoresolvingthefindingsidentifiedinthe
auditreport.
Wearehappytoansweranyquestions.PleasecontactMarvaSutherland,InspectorGeneral,byphoneat
(443)378-4060orviaemailatMarva.Sutherland@maryland.govifyouwouldliketocontinuethe
conversation.
Inservice,
RafaelLópez
Secretary
Enclosures:
cc:
CarnitraWhite,PrincipalDeputySecretary
DanielWait,DeputySecretaryofOperations
KirillReznik,ActingChiefFinancialOfficer
WebsterYe,ChiefofStaff
AugustinNtabaganyimana,ActingExecutiveDirectorofFIA
MarvaSutherland,InspectorGeneral
Shelly-AnnDyer,AssistantInspectorGeneralforAudits
311W.SaratogaStreet,Baltimore,MD21201-3500|Tel:1-800-332-6347|TTY:1-800-735-2258|www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA)
Finding 2
FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving TCA benefits beyond the five years
allowed by federal and State regulations.
Recommendation 2a
We recommend that FIA comply with existing federal and State regulations by terminating
TCA benefits to all recipients after five years unless a documented hardship exemption and
related independence plan is prepared and approved, as required (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2a
Status as of Completed Completion Date: November
11/1/2023 2023
The Family Investment Administration (FIA) has implemented system
changes to alert case managers when a case is reaching the 60-month
time limit for the Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) program so that
they may initiate a discussion with the household to determine if they
qualify for a hardship exemption to remain in the program. The
Eligibility & Enrollment (E&E) system features include:
● Create worker alerts for all TCA cases at the 58th month. The
alerts will remind case managers to reach out to customers and
complete an assessment and Family Independence Plan (FIP) to
determine if the customer meets the criteria for a hardship.
Please provide details
of corrective action
● A counter to track the number of hardships and extensions
taken.
granted.
● If no hardship exemption or extension is granted, the system
will automatically close the case and send the customer a
closure/denial letter of adverse action.
Implementing the above system enhancements will ensure that case
managers are engaged in proactive discussions with TCA households
and take timely actions to obtain a hardship exemption or close the
cases, whichever is appropriate.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
FIA will continue to monitor a sample of TCA cases that reach 60-
months on a monthly basis to ensure the local departments are
following the policy and procedures for TCA 60-month cases.
The administration is finalizing an Action Transmittal (AT) to provide
instructions for the local departments on how to case manage
households as they near the program time limit.
It is important to note that when the system enhancements went live on
November 17, 2023, a “how to” user guide was provided to the local
departments and it is also located on the E&E system. Therefore, the
local departments know how to handle the cases based on the guide.
By March 31, 2024, FIA will evaluate this process to confirm whether
it has effectively prevented cases from continuing to receive TCA
benefits if they do not have a qualifying hardship exemption in the
system.
Recommendation 2b
We recommend that FIA determine the extent of improper payments and, in conjunction
with the federal granting agency, develop a plan to address any amounts improperly
recovered from the federal granting agency, and notify the General Assembly budget
committees and the Department of Budget and Management of the extent of State
payments made in violation of the aforementioned State regulations (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2b
Status as of N/A - Department Disagreed Completion Date:
N/A
11/1/2023
FIA disagrees with the recommendation. At the time of the audit, we
confirmed that the recipients were eligible to receive TCA benefits
based on hardship with the exception of 3 cases, which were being
assessed for further action accordingly. To date, we have subsequently
Please provide details
confirmed the identified cases were also eligible for a hardship
of corrective action
taken.
exemption.
For the cases cited, the evidence of hardship was not always
consistently documented in the case file. For example, medical

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
documentation was in the case file to identify a disability which meets
the criteria for hardship, but the hardship form was not completed by
the local department. FIA has taken measures to ensure the
documentation for hardship is adequately included in the case file. FIA
has conducted case worker training and issued written guidance on the
proper documentation of hardship.
The system changes that were made also ensure that evidence of
hardship exemption is uploaded before benefit can continue beyond the
60-month time limit. A report of cases that exceeded the 60-month
time limit was compiled and shared with the locals including
instructions to assess the recipient's situation, document the hardship,
and upload the documentation into E&E via the Enterprise Content
Management System (ECMS).
FIA does conduct a monthly TCA 60-month case review to see if the
required documentation is in the case file. Based on the reviews
conducted it appears that compliance in this area is improving.
Additionally, the recently implemented system enhancements will help
to further improve documentation collection.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Follow-up on Computer Matches
Finding 6
FIA did not ensure that all social security number alerts were recorded in CARES for
follow-up purposes.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that FIA ensure all SSN match alerts are properly recorded in
the system for follow up (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6
Status as of In Progress Completion Ongoing
11/1/2023 Date:
To address this issue, FIA has worked with Maryland Total Human-
Services Integrated Network (MD THINK) to generate Social
Security Number (SSN) match alerts. The SSN Alerts have been a
part of the E&E System since conversion in 2021. The alerts
identify public assistance recipients whose SSNs could not be
verified in the federal system. A case manager must follow-up on
each of the alerts and contact the customer, as necessary to resolve
the issue. SSN alerts are generated and displayed on the case
managers’ Case Homepage in the system.
Please provide
details of corrective
action taken.
The department has created an E&E report that shows the total
number of SSN alerts, including all outstanding alerts. The report
allows local staff to perform ongoing monitoring to ensure that SSN
alerts are addressed and the match results are properly recorded in
E&E.
There is a system feature that identifies if the SSN has not been
federally verified.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 7
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and appropriate follow-up on PARIS
alerts. Our review disclosed that the LDSSs did not take timely or appropriate action for 43
of the 46 alerts we tested.
Recommendation 7a
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs PARIS alert activity to ensure that the LDSSs
conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of PARIS alerts (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7a
Status as of Completed Completion Date: January
11/1/2023 2023
FIA has worked with MD THINK to develop a Public Assistance
Reporting Information System (PARIS) alerts report to allow local
departments of social services to monitor and complete the alerts. On a
Please provide details monthly basis, FIA runs a report to identify locals that are behind in
of corrective action their dispositioning of the alerts. Effective January 2023, the
taken. Management Evaluation Unit (ME) sent Overdue PARIS Alert Memos
to all local jurisdictions with delays in disposition of the alerts. The
jurisdictions are given 10 business days to properly address and
dispose of outstanding alerts.
Recommendation 7b
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs PARIS alert activity to ensure that the LDSSs
update the system and case notes for unreported income identified by the PARIS reports
(repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7b
Status as of In Progress Completion Date: January
11/1/2023 2024
Effective January 2024, the ME unit within the Bureau of Quality
Control (BQC) will begin the review process on the overdue PARIS
alerts. Thirty of the previous month’s overdue alerts will be sampled to
Please provide details determine if the LDSS executed the appropriate procedures in
of corrective action
dispositioning the alert. This review process includes checking for
taken.
proper narration, ensuring that unreported income is properly counted
in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)/TCA
calculations, and ensuring that any claims related to the PARIS alert
are properly processed. The LDSS is given 30-days following the date

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
notification was received to correct all errors and complete the Error
Response Form.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Contract Monitoring
Finding 9
FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and agreements related to its public
assistance programs.
Recommendation 9a
We recommend that FIA obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records,
timesheets, and receipts, to verify the accuracy of billings, as required by policy (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 9a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
June 2023
11/1/2023
● All vendors and grantees are required to submit supporting
documentation with all invoices. The contract manager must
provide the vendor outcomes within the Quarterly Report and
proof of monitoring along with the invoice and supporting
documentation for approval of payment.
● The Emergency Food Program updated the standard operating
procedure (SOP) to reflect that supporting documents must
accompany all invoices for payment rather than on a test basis.
Please provide details ● The Emergency Food Program held meetings in smaller groups
of corrective action with all vendors to introduce the practice of providing
taken. supporting documentation with every invoice. Meetings are
held individually if technical assistance is needed.
● Each contract is monitored differently and is consistent with
FIA’s Contract Monitoring and Invoice Protocol. The protocol
is being implemented to improve contract and invoice
monitoring. FIA continues to work on improving our contract
monitoring and invoice processing.
● DHS has established a new protocol for receiving and
reviewing invoices prior to payment.

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 9c
We recommend that FIA in conjunction with DHS, formally determine which entity is
responsible for LDSS contract oversight and establish processes to oversee and approve
LDSS public assistance contracts and agreements to ensure that the related invoices are
consistent with the agreements and that the agreed-upon services are received (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 9c
Status as of In Progress Completion Date:
March 2024
11/1/2023
● FIA developed a three-pronged strategy to address this concern.
The strategy included the provision of period training to local
contract managers who are responsible for drafting scopes of
work, reviewing invoices, processing invoices, and monitoring
contracts. It also included a plan to develop a central team to
provide oversight of local contracts and ongoing technical
assistance. Two of the three prongs including technical
assistance and ongoing training have been implemented.
● DHS implemented a fiscal delegation of authority (attached,
effective April 3, 2023) process agency-wide.
Please provide details
of corrective action
taken.
● FIA has established a process for reviewing and signing off on
LDSS contracts.
● FIA has established and implemented an annual contract
compliance training and provides ongoing technical assistance
to local contract managers.
● The revised contract SOP will be shared with every local office.
● FIA will require each LDSSs to submit a SOP for contract
monitoring and invoice processing protocol.

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Grants Management
Finding 10
FIA did not obtain supporting documentation to support grant funds were spent as
intended.
Recommendation 10a
We recommend that FIA independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are
spent as intended by obtaining and reviewing documentation to support the propriety of
payments (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 10a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
June 2023
11/1/2023
● All vendors and grantees are required to submit supporting
Please provide details
documentation with all invoices. The contract manager must
of corrective action
provide the vendor outcomes within the Quarterly Report and
taken.
proof of monitoring along with the invoice and supporting
documentation for approval of payment.
● FIA updated the SOP to reflect that supporting documents must
accompany all invoices for payment rather than on a test basis.
● FIA held meetings in smaller groups with all vendors to
introduce the practice of providing supporting documentation
with every invoice. Meetings are held individually if technical
assistance is needed.
● Contract Managers are required to review invoices in
accordance with the new SOP.

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s October 21, 2022 Audit Report on the
Department of Human Services – Family Investment Administration (FIA)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA)
2. We recommend that FIA
a. comply with existing federal and State regulations by
terminating TCA benefits to all recipients after five years Resolved
unless a documented hardship exemption and related
independence plan is prepared and approved, as required.
b. determine the extent of improper payments and, in
conjunction with the federal granting agency, develop a plan
to address any amounts improperly recovered from the
federal granting agency, and notify the General Assembly Resolved1
budget committees and the Department of Budget and
Management of the extent of State payments made in
violation of the aforementioned State regulations.
Follow-up on Computer Matches
6. We recommend that FIA ensure all SSN match alerts are Not Resolved
properly recorded in the system for follow-up. (In Progress)
7. We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs PARIS alert activity to
ensure that the LDSSs Not Resolved
a. conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of PARIS alerts. (In Progress)
b. update the system and case notes for unreported income
Not Resolved
identified by the PARIS reports.
(In Progress)
Contract Monitoring
9. We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records, Not Resolved
timesheets, and receipts, to verify the accuracy of billings, as (In Progress)
required by policy.
1 Item was deemed to be resolved by OLA after receipt of pertinent information from FIA subsequent to the issuance
of the audit report.

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s October 21, 2022 Audit Report on the
Department of Human Services – Family Investment Administration (FIA)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
c. in conjunction with DHS, formally determine which entity is
responsible for LDSS contract oversight and establish
processes to oversee and approve LDSS public assistance Not Resolved
contracts and agreements to ensure that the related invoices (In Progress)
are consistent with the agreements and that the agreed-upon
services are received.
Grant Management
10. We recommend that FIA
Not Resolved
a. independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds
(In Progress)
are spent as intended by obtaining and reviewing
documentation to support the propriety of payments.

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings and Recommendations That
Were Not Resolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 6
We recommend that FIA ensure all SSN match alerts are properly recorded in the system
for follow up (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that FIA asserted all SSNs not verified by the Social Security
Administration (SSA) were automatically recorded as alerts in the MD THINK Eligibility and
Enrollment (E&E) system for follow-up. However, FIA was unable to provide evidence that this
automated function had been tested to ensure that all SSNs not verified by SSA were properly
populated as an alert. For example, a report of all unverified SSNs was not compared to a report
of alerts recorded in the E&E system.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 7
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs PARIS alert activity to ensure that the LDSSs
a. conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of PARIS alerts (repeat), and
b. update the system and case notes for unreported income identified by the PARIS
reports (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that while FIA implemented monthly Overdue Public Assistance Reporting
Information (PARIS) Alert Memos to the Local Departments of Social Services (LDSSs), FIA
had not completed its monthly Management Evaluation reviews to ensure that appropriate
follow-up actions were taken in response to the alert memos. Effective January 2024, FIA
developed a standard operating procedure (SOP) to detail FIA’s monitoring process over the
LDSS timely completion and appropriate execution of PARIS alerts. However, as of the time of
OLA’s review (January 2024), FIA had not completed any reviews in accordance with the
SOP. Therefore, we concluded that FIA had not ensured that the LDSSs updated the system and
case notes for unreported income identified by the PARIS alerts.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 9
We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records, timesheets, and receipts, to
verify the accuracy of billings, as required by policy (repeat); and
c. in conjunction with DHS, formally determine which entity is responsible for LDSS
contract oversight and establish processes to oversee and approve LDSS public

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 14, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
assistance contracts and agreements to ensure that the related invoices are consistent
with the agreements and that the agreed-upon services are received (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that FIA established a process that required FIA to obtain and review the
documentation to support invoices. However, FIA could not provide documentation that it
regularly obtained and reviewed the supporting documentation to verify the accuracy of payroll
expenditures included on the invoices.
Furthermore, our review disclosed that FIA determined that it was responsible for LDSS contract
oversight, including approving LDSS public assistance contracts and agreements to ensure the
invoices were adequate and the services had been provided. However, at the time of OLA’s
review FIA had not formalized the related oversight processes and it had not established a team
to perform this work.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 10
We recommend that FIA
a. independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are spent as intended by
obtaining and reviewing documentation to support the propriety of payments.
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that FIA had established a process to independently verify grant funds were
spent as intended by obtaining and reviewing documentation to support the propriety of
payments. However, FIA did not have documentation that the process was implemented.
Specifically, FIA lacked documentation that it requested and reviewed the applicable supporting
documentation for expenditures, such as timesheets to support the personnel-related
expenditures. Rather, FIA relied on grantee-generated expenditure reports that summarized the
expenditures related to the grant.