Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Unemployment Insurance to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2023 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 05/13/2024
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6643980b2772ae874ff6ed90
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:15:38.479147
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 13, 2024
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the Maryland
Department of Labor (MDL) Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) to resolve the four
repeat findings in our November 15, 2022 audit report. This review was conducted in
accordance with a requirement specified in the April 2023 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page
151. The JCR required that, prior to the release of $100,000 of its administrative appropriation
for fiscal year 2024, MDL must take corrective action on all repeat audit findings on or before
November 1, 2023. The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget
committees listing each repeat audit finding along with a determination that each repeat finding
was corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget
committees to review and release the funds prior to the end of the fiscal year.
The November 15, 2022 audit report of DUI contained four repeat audit findings
(findings 2, 3, 6, and 7) that were addressed by eight recommendations. In accordance with the
April 2023 JCR requirement, DUI provided a status report to OLA, dated November 1, 2023,
detailing certain corrective actions that had been completed and actions that were ongoing with
respect to all four repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1). The DUI status report indicated that
corrective actions had been completed for two findings and for certain elements of the remaining

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- May 13, 2024
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
two findings. We have edited DUI’s status report to remove certain vendor information, as
allowed by our policy.
We reviewed the DUI status report and related documentation, performed limited tests
and analyses of the information, and held discussions with DUI personnel as necessary to assess
the implementation status of the related recommendations. Our review did not constitute an
audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Based on our review, we determined that DUI had not yet taken sufficient actions to
correct Findings 2, 3, 6, and 7. Specifically, although DUI had implemented certain elements of
the recommendations related to all four findings, the actions to date did not address the entirety
of each finding (Exhibit 2). Consequently, at the time of our review, our assessment of Findings
2, 3, 6 and 7 concluded that they were still in progress (Exhibit 3). Finally, we believe it is
possible that untimely corrective actions by DUI may have contributed to the statute of
limitations adversely impacting the appropriate resolution of certain unresolved findings.
We shared our results with DUI, which generally disagreed with our assessment based on
the information it originally presented in its November 2023 status report without effectively
adding any additional information. Subsequently, we reviewed our work and believe that the
conclusions we present in this document, and describe above, are correct representations of the
current implementation status for the repeat audit findings. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the review by DUI. We trust our response satisfactorily
addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- May 13, 2024
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Portia Y. Wu, Esq., MDL
Jason Perkins-Cohen, Deputy Secretary, MDL
Margaret M. Rekstis, Acting Assistant Secretary for Unemployment Insurance, DUI
Elizabeth L. Williams, Executive Director, Office of Administration, MDL
Samuel K. Pannoh, Director, Office of Program Analysis and Audit, MDL
Jamie B. Mangrum, Director, Office of Communications and Media Relations, MDL
Likivu Speaks, Director of Fiscal & Support Services, DUI
Joan M. Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget and
Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Emily R. Haskel, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 13, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Benefit Payments
Finding 2
DUI did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that individuals filing claims using a
foreign Internet Protocol (IP) address were eligible to receive benefits, including 3,724
claimants that received benefit payments totaling $3.6 million.
Recommendation 2c
We recommend that DUI investigate the foreign IP addresses identified in this finding and
take corrective action for any ineligible claimants and benefits identified (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2c
Status as of 11/1/2023 Completed Completion Date: 9/1/2023
The claims identified in this audit have been investigated with
Please provide details of LexisNexis. Unfortunately, all claims were paid outside the statute of
corrective action taken. limitation of 3 years. We completed the recommendation on 9/1/2023.
Finding 3
DUI did not ensure claimants who were full-time students were eligible for benefits, and
that all claimants were enrolled in the Maryland Workforce Exchange System, as required.
Recommendation 3a
We recommend that DUI establish procedures, such as periodic matches to State higher
education institution enrollment records, to identify and follow up on claimants who are
attending school full-time but fail to disclose it (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3a
Status as of 11/1/2023 In Progress Completion Date:
A. Despite reaching out to various agencies, DUI couldn't obtain detailed
data because of privacy law compliance. We are unable to perform
Please provide details of
periodic matches with State higher education institution enrollment
corrective action taken.
records due to FERPA restrictions.
Recommendation 3b
We recommend that DUI follow up on all applicants who state they are attending school to
determine whether it impacts eligibility for unemployment benefits (repeat).

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 13, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Recommendation 3b
Status as of 11/1/2023 Completed Completion Date: 7/1/2023
B. DUI resumed adjudicating issues involving school attendance on
Please provide details of 7/1/2023.
corrective action taken.
Recommendation 3c
We recommend that DUI verify that all claimants comply with applicable enrollment
requirements, including the Maryland Workforce Exchange system (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3c
Status as of 11/1/2023 In Progress Completion Date: 2/29/2024
C. PIR 69445, which aims to ensure claimant compliance with
enrollment requirements, including the Maryland Workforce
Exchange (MWE) system, is currently ongoing. After completion, the
PIR will collaborate with MWE system vendor to generate a report of
Please provide details of individuals who haven't registered on MWE, and this report will be
corrective action taken. shared with DUI. Subsequently, BEACON will generate action items
for each listed claimant, reminding them to complete their MWE
registration and providing a direct link to MWE. The expected
completion date for this process is February 29, 2024.
Recommendation 3d
We recommend that DUI take timely and appropriate corrective action for any potentially
ineligible claimants or benefits identified, including those noted in this finding (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3d
Status as of 11/1/2023 In Progress Completion Date: 12/31/2023
D. DUI will investigate the findings and apply appropriate corrective
measures against claimants who are ineligible for benefits, including
those highlighted in the audit finding. Currently, we are in the process
Please provide details of
of reviewing the claims mentioned in this audit finding. It's worth
corrective action taken.
noting that many of these claims either did not receive payment or are
over three years old, which exceeds our statute of limitations. We
anticipate concluding this task by December 31, 2023.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 13, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Claims Processing
Finding 6
DUI did not adequately review regular claims and adjudications processed by claims center
DUI employees and temporary staff, and output reports of manual wage entries could not
be generated from BEACON for verification purposes.
Recommendation 6a
We recommend that DUI ensure that supervisors at claim centers perform the required
reviews of claims processed (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6a
Status as of 11/1/2023 Completed Completion Date: 08/31/2023
A. Review of claims and adjudication issues resumed in August 2022.
Please provide details of
corrective action taken.
Finding 7
DUI did not establish sufficient controls over reissued debit cards, and did not ensure the
proper disposition of funds remaining on expired debit cards.
Recommendation 7a
We recommend that DUI establish procedures to ensure all reissued debit cards are subject
to an independent review and approval (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7a
Status as of 11/1/2023 Completed Completion Date: 05/21/2021
1. DUI stopped issuing new debit cards on 5/21/21. The deadline to order
a replacement debit card from the sponsoring bank was 1/5/2022. DUI
Please provide details of
has updated BEACON and is waiting for the conclusion of the exit
corrective action taken.
agreement with the Bank to clawback the funds on the debits.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 13, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 7c
We recommend that DUI establish procedures to ensure unspent funds remaining on debit
cards are returned to DUI or reported to the State Comptroller as unclaimed property in
accordance with the Maryland Unemployment Benefits Debit Card Deposit Agreement
(repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7c
Status as of 11/1/2023 In Progress Completion Date:
C. DUI is working with the bank to resolve the conflict concerning
clawback of the funds. Once the exit agreement is concluded, DUI will
Please provide details of
process the funds clawback and remit federal money to USDOL and keep
corrective action taken.
the state money in UI Trust Fund account.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 13, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s November 15, 2022 Audit Report on the
Maryland Department of Labor – Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Benefit Payments
2. We recommend that DUI
c. investigate the foreign IP addresses identified in this Not Resolved
finding and take corrective action for any ineligible (In Progress)
claimants and benefits identified.
Benefit Payments
3. We recommend that DUI
a. establish procedures, such as periodic matches to State
Not Resolved
higher education institution enrollment records, to identify
(In Progress)
and follow up on claimants who are attending school full-
time but fail to disclose it.
b. follow up on all applicants who state they are attending
school to determine whether it impacts eligibility for
Resolved
unemployment benefits.
c. verify that all claimants comply with applicable enrollment
requirements, including the Maryland Workforce Exchange Not Resolved
system. (In Progress)
d. take timely and appropriate corrective action for any
potentially ineligible claimants or benefits identified, Not Resolved
including those noted in this finding. (In Progress)
Claims Processing
6. We recommend that DUI
Not Resolved
a. ensure that supervisors at claim centers perform the
(In Progress)
required reviews of claims processed.
Claims Processing
7. We recommend that DUI establish procedures to ensure
Not Resolved
a. all reissued debit cards are subject to an independent
(In Progress)
review and approval.
c. unspent funds remaining on debit cards are returned to
DUI or reported to the State Comptroller as unclaimed
Not Resolved
property in accordance with the aforementioned
(In Progress)
Agreement.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 13, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings and Recommendations That
Were Not Resolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 2
We recommend that DUI
c. investigate the foreign IP addresses identified in this finding and take corrective action
for any ineligible claimants and benefits identified (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that DUI could provide no documentation of any investigation it had
conducted into the IP addresses in question, including the timing and results of any such
investigation. DUI stated in its status report that it had completed implementation of this
recommendation on September 1, 2023, but DUI also indicated in its response that all claims
related to the foreign IP addresses identified in the finding were paid outside of the three-year
statute of limitations. Although DUI now asserts that no action can be taken to recover any
improper benefit payments identified, during the course of our audit many of the IP addresses in
question were provided to DUI (prior to expiration of the three-year statute limitation).
Furthermore, as of the date of our audit report, November 15, 2022, approximately $609,454 in
claim payments relating to the IP addresses in question had not yet exceeded the statute of
limitations and could have been subject to corrective action if found to be improper in a timely
manner. Finally, although the statute of limitations may have restricted recovery of certain prior
claim payments, the investigation and identification of any ineligible claimants associated with
the IP addresses in question, regardless of subsequent recovery, may have helped DUI ensure
that future improper payments were not made to the same claimants.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 3
We recommend that DUI
a. establish procedures, such as periodic matches to State higher education institution
enrollment records, to identify and follow up on claimants who are attending school
full-time but fail to disclose it (repeat);
c. verify that all claimants comply with applicable enrollment requirements, including the
Maryland Workforce Exchange system (repeat); and
d. take timely and appropriate corrective action for any potentially ineligible claimants or
benefits identified, including those noted in this finding (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that DUI has not established procedures to identify and follow up on
claimants who are attending school full-time but fail to disclose it, and in its status report DUI
indicated that implementation of our recommendation to do so is in progress. DUI also stated
that despite reaching out to various agencies, DUI could not obtain detailed data because of

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 13, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
privacy law compliance. DUI further stated that it was unable to perform periodic matches with
State higher education institution enrollment records due to federal regulations. DUI advised us
that it held conversations with multiple educational agencies and institutions within Maryland all
of which indicated that they would not be able to provide the requested data. However, we were
advised that DUI had no formal documentation supporting this assertion, including specific data
requested, related responses received, all options discussed, and meeting participants. While we
recognize that federal regulations restrict access to certain student data, those regulations include
exceptions, as well as provisions for directory information. For example, simple student
directories may exist for a particular institution’s community members, to which DUI may seek
authorization to access. With no specific documentation provided to us by DUI, it was unclear
as to the extent to which DUI pursued such potential options.
Our review disclosed that while DUI has attempted to correct system issues to identify claimants
who had failed to complete the required Maryland Workforce Exchange registration, technical
issues persist and that process is ongoing. Furthermore, our review disclosed that DUI is still in
the process of reviewing the claimants and benefits identified in this finding. It should be noted
that with the passage of time, recovery of any improper benefit payments may be restricted by
the statute of limitations mentioned above in Finding 2.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 6
We recommend that DUI
a. ensure that supervisors at claim centers perform the required reviews of claims
processed (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that DUI did not ensure that all required supervisory reviews were being
conducted, as we found that work performed by certain claims processors was not subject to
supervisory review. Specifically, we identified claim processors at three of the four DUI claim
centers whose work was not included in the supervisory reviews for the week we selected for
testing.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 7
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DUI establish procedures to ensure
a. all reissued debit cards are subject to an independent review and approval (repeat);
and
c. unspent funds remaining on debit cards are returned to DUI or reported to the State
Comptroller as unclaimed property in accordance with the aforementioned Agreement
(repeat).

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 13, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that DUI no longer issues debit cards, but instead uses direct deposit and
checks when reissuance of a payment is required. With this change, DUI also established certain
new polices for reissuing a benefit payment. However, those policies do not include a
requirement that reissuance of a payment be subject to independent review and approval.
Our review also disclosed that DUI is still in the process of resolving the return of unspent funds
remaining on debit cards with the applicable bank.