Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Queen Anne's County
Date: 05/17/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=664b415e4e7a9c2d468ed83d
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:06:38.059679
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Queen Anne’s County, Maryland
May 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 17, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Queen Anne’s County for the period beginning January 21, 2020 and
ending August 31, 2023. The Office performs various functions for the public,
including maintaining various legal records, recording certain real estate
documents, collecting related fees and taxes, and issuing certain licenses.
Our audit disclosed the Office did not perform documented independent
verifications to ensure collections received were deposited.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Office, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendation, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues. In accordance with our policy, we have
edited the Judiciary’s response to remove vendor names or products.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office. We also wish to acknowledge the Judiciary’s and the Office’s willingness
to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Queen Anne’s County and its incorporated municipalities, and others, and
subsequently distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2023
revenues totaled $18,237,668. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $12,209,550 was distributed to Queen Anne’s County and its incorporated
municipalities,
 $18,619 was distributed to others, and
 $6,009,499 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The majority of the Office’s fiscal year 2023 expenditures, which totaled
$1,710,411 (see Figure 1 on the following page), were salaries and wages that
were paid primarily from a general fund appropriation.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds that, according to its
records, had balances totaling $9,206 as of July 31, 2023.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Queen Anne’s County
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 15 93.8%
Vacant 1 6.2%
Total 16
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $1,647,099 96.3%
Operating Expenses 63,312 3.7%
Total $1,710,411
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $1,584,224 92.6%
Special Fund 121,072 7.1%
Reimbursable Fund 5,115 0.3%
Total $1,710,411
Source: State financial and personnel records
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office did not perform documented independent verifications to ensure
collections received were deposited.
Analysis
The Office did not perform documented independent verifications to ensure
collections received were deposited. While we were advised that deposit
verifications were performed, we determined that the two employees responsible
for performing the verifications were not independent of the collection function.
4

--- Page 7 ---
In addition, our testing found that the process was not documented. Specifically,
we judgmentally selected 16 daily collections totaling $278,904 during the period
January 2022 through August 2023 and found that there was no documentation
that the Office had performed independent verifications to ensure the collections
were subsequently deposited. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires independent verification of collections to deposit.
As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all Office collections were
deposited. Our aforementioned test of 16 daily collections did not disclose any
discrepancies between amounts collected and the subsequent deposits. According
to the Office’s records, in fiscal year 2023 it collected $6.2 million in checks and
cash, primarily for land transactions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office ensure that an independent and documented
verification of collections received to amounts deposited is performed. We
advised the Office how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Queen Anne’s County, Maryland for the period beginning January 21,
2020 and ending August 31, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), certain payroll activities, and bank accounts.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as human resources and payroll activities, invoice processing, and maintenance of
budgetary accounting records) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Judiciary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 21, 2020 to August 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
6

--- Page 9 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of the Office, to our finding and
recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 11 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Queen Anne’s County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office did not perform documented independent verifications to ensure
collections received were deposited.
We recommend that the Office ensure that an independent and documented
verification of collections received to amounts deposited is performed. We
advised the Office how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide A review of the daily deposit slip to the daily collections, subsequently
additional comments as to the daily deposit to the armored courier (to the bank) was performed
deemed necessary. daily, however it was not performed by an independent reviewer. Fiscal
clerk(s) and a Clerk Supervisor were both performing these reviews
daily, as staffing levels at the time did not allow for a truly independent
review. As a compensating control to the internal review at the Clerk’s
office, the Administrative Office of the Courts Department of Budget
and Finance (AOC) receive the deposit information from the bank and
compares it to the deposit totals reported by our office. Any discrepancy
would have prompted an immediate explanation.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/07/2023
Please provide details of The Sr. Supervisor, who is independent of the collection process, verifies
corrective action or the daily work total collections report; deposit ticket; and the daily bank
explain disagreement. deposit report received from the Administrative Office of the Courts
Department of Budget and Finance. This employee is ensuring all the
deposit totals match and signs and dates these reports as proof of
verification.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Dianne P. Ramirez
Senior Auditor
Samantha J. Rhea
Staff Auditor