Title: Review of a Matter Involving Fees Quoted by the Department of General Services for a Request Made by an Applicant for Public Records Under Maryland’s Public Information Act
Date: 05/28/2024
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6655f6092b6c66f6aa7130b0
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:06:47.677585
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 28, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) conducted a review of a matter involving potentially
unreasonable fees quoted by the Department of General Services (DGS) for a request made by an
applicant for public records under Maryland’s Public Information Act (PIA). This matter was
referred to us by the Board of Public Works (BPW) after it completed an investigation into a
complaint that had been filed with BPW. Our review disclosed that DGS had not established a
documented methodology for calculating the fees charged to PIA applicants and did not maintain
detailed support to substantiate the quoted fees. Consequently, we were unable to conclude on
the reasonableness of the fees quoted to the applicant who submitted this PIA request to DGS.
We conducted the review under the authority of State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. Since this review was not an audit conducted in accordance with
Government Auditing Standards, we did not include recommendations. To complete our review,
we interviewed employees at DGS and reviewed documentation received from personnel at
BPW and DGS. We did not replicate the document request made by the PIA applicant (similar
to the one made by BPW) because it had already been performed by BPW in its investigation
into the complaint and would not enable a definitive conclusion on the amount quoted by DGS in
response to the PIA request (as explained below). In addition, we reviewed past PIA records
maintained by DGS, such as requests submitted to DGS and the related responses DGS sent to
these applicants.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair -2- May 28, 2024
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
Background of Maryland’s Public Information Act
The PIA generally grants people the right to access information and records about the affairs of
State government and official acts of public officials and State employees. Applicants seeking
records typically submit written requests to the agencies that maintain custody of the records.
The PIA generally prohibits agencies from charging applicants a fee for the first two hours that
are needed to produce the records, but agencies may charge applicants a “reasonable fee” for
costs incurred after those two hours. State law defines a “reasonable fee” as “a fee bearing a
reasonable relationship to the recovery of actual costs incurred by a governmental unit.” State
agencies generally have 30 days to produce the requested records, but this time limit may be
extended an additional 30 days with the consent of the applicant.
BPW Review of the PIA Request
We were advised by BPW personnel that they had performed a review of a PIA request for all
contractual records related to a certain DGS procurement as part of its investigation into a
complaint that had been filed with BPW. The complaint pertained to potentially unreasonable
fees DGS quoted to an applicant that submitted a request for public records in August 2022. The
applicant was seeking all documents and information for a contract that was administered by
DGS, including all communications between DGS and certain entities involved in the contract.
DGS’ September 2022 response to the applicant stated that it estimated it would take 722 hours
of labor at a cost of $78,597 to produce the records, plus additional attorney’s fees to ensure the
legality of certain disclosures. DGS also stated that prepayment of the fee would be required
prior to DGS delivering the documents.
In its response to the DGS letter, legal representation for the applicant stated that the fee quoted
by DGS was exorbitant, and rather than litigate the fees in court, it submitted a revised less
comprehensive PIA request. A letter DGS sent to the applicant in response to the revised PIA
request stated it would reduce the fee to $50,000. Ultimately, the applicant did not pay the fee or
receive the documents from either the initial or revised request.
BPW personnel advised us that they requested similar documents from DGS that originally had
been requested by the PIA applicant and concluded that, based on the volume and nature of the
documents DGS provided, they did not believe it would require “anywhere close” to 722 hours
quoted to the applicant to produce the documents (let alone the 1,756 hours actually used to
calculate the cost, as noted below). In the opinion of BPW personnel, all of the documents
provided to them by DGS could have been reviewed, redacted, and produced within 24 hours;
however, we found that this estimate omitted the time required to locate the documents from
DGS’ procurement files and emails, which while not calculated could have been significant
given the comprehensiveness of the original PIA request. Consequently, we were not readily
able to assess the reasonableness or correctness of BPW’s conclusion.

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair -3- May 28, 2024
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
OLA Review of DGS’ Calculation of PIA Request Fees
Our own review disclosed that DGS had not established a documented methodology for
calculating the fees charged to PIA applicants to ensure the fee amounts reasonably reflected the
recovery of actual costs, as permitted by State law. We were advised by DGS personnel that the
fees charged to PIA applicants are calculated based on the estimated number of labor hours
required to compile the requested records and the hourly salary rates of the employees who
maintained custody of and reviewed these records. DGS was unable to provide us with any
documented methodology showing how it determined who was responsible for the identification,
collection, redaction, and review of the requested documents and how it estimated the number of
labor hours required to complete these tasks.
In addition, our review of documentation provided by DGS for its calculation of the fees for the
PIA request referenced in the referral to OLA from BPW disclosed that DGS had incorrectly
quoted the 722 hours needed to complete this request in its letter to the applicant. DGS actually
used 1,756 hours (excluding two free labor hours) to calculate the total fee of $78,597. DGS
agreed that the number of hours quoted to the applicant was an error and provided us the
following breakdown of the 1,756 hours:
 78 hours for its PIA Officer,
 300 hours for two DGS executive management employees in the Office of State
Procurement, and
 1,378 hours for four employees in the Business Enterprise Administration unit.
We then requested support for the estimated hours used by DGS in its calculation. DGS did not
have detailed support for its calculation of the hours (and therefore the fees) for this PIA request,
such as a listing of the documents that would have been provided to the applicant, which is one
of the primary factors used to determine the hours needed to fulfill the request. DGS advised us
that, in addition to the contract documents, it identified over 7,860 emails that were related to the
procurement that was the subject of the request, each of which needed to be compiled and
reviewed before providing them to the requestor. However, DGS could not provide us with
documentation to support the specific documents and emails it had identified for this request. As
a result, we were unable to determine if the fees quoted to the applicant were reasonable for the
request.
Disposition of Other DGS PIA Requests in Calendar Year 2022
Our review of documentation provided by DGS identified 97 other PIA requests submitted to
DGS in calendar year 2022, of which 54 requests were completed at costs ranging from $0
(because fewer than two hours were required to produce the requested records) to $292. Eight of
the requests were not completed because the applicant did not pay the fee (estimated fees quoted
to the eight requestors ranged from $230 to $3,500 per PIA request). The remaining 35 requests

--- Page 4 ---
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair -4- May 28, 2024
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
were not completed for other reasons, such as DGS determining that it did not have custody of
the requested documents.
After discussing our results, DGS generally agreed with the accuracy of the information
presented. DGS advised that it is working on a new policy which will address the issues noted in
this letter. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review by DGS
and BPW personnel.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair, Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair, House Appropriations Committee
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Atif T. Chaudhry, Department of General Services
Nelson E. Reichart, Deputy Secretary, Department of General Services
John T. Gontrum, Executive Secretary, Board of Public Works
Gabriel Gnall, Procurement Advisor, Board of Public Works
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services