Title: Maryland Department of Health - State Psychiatric Hospital Centers - Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center - Eastern Shore Hospital Center - Spring Grove Hospital Center - Springfield Hospital Center - Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Date: 05/29/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66578a448260d07e25a513ef
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:06:58.027534
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
May 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 29, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health’s (MDH) five State Psychiatric Hospital Centers (SPHCs). This audit of
the SPHCs included the following units for the periods noted:
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center (CTPHC) for the period beginning
May 15, 2019 and ending June 30, 2022,
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) for the period beginning May 21,
2018 and ending June 30, 2022,
 Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC) for the period beginning February
19, 2019 and ending June 30, 2022,
 Springfield Hospital Center (SHC) for the period beginning May 30, 2018
and ending June 30, 2022, and
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center (TBFHC) for the period beginning
October 22, 2018 and ending June 30, 2022.
These SPHCs provide a wide range of comprehensive health and psychiatric
services to patients throughout the State including inpatient treatment,
competency and criminal responsibility evaluations, long-term inpatient services,
and services to individuals in a maximum-security environment.
In our previous audits of the SPHCs we issued separate audit reports for each
hospital center. Effective May 31, 2019, the MDH transferred oversight of the
SPHCs from the Behavioral Health Administration budgetary unit to the MDH

--- Page 4 ---
Operations Administration budgetary unit. To promote audit efficiency, we have
consolidated our review of the SPHCs into one audit. Consequently, this report
contains findings common to each of the five hospital centers, as well as those
applicable to individual or specific centers, with our recommendations for the
SPHCs being made to the MDH Healthcare System unit under the MDH
Operations Administration.
Our audit disclosed that the SPHCs did not use the appropriate payment method
for $28.7 million in contractual services. This resulted in payments issued
without the control of matching an invoice to the corresponding contract/purchase
order prior to payment. We also found that CTPHC did not adequately monitor
its housekeeping vendor. For example, CTPHC could not document that it
conducted inspections of vendor work required by the contract between August
2019 and December 2021 and did not perform 10 of 13 required inspections
between December 2021 and September 2022.
We also noted the SPHCs did not ensure amounts paid for pharmaceuticals were
consistent with related contracts. The SPHCs did not have comprehensive price
lists to verify purchases totaling $20.2 million during the respective audit periods.
The SPHCs also did not have adequate controls over disposed controlled
dangerous substances (CDS). For example, access to CDS, which may be abused
or cause addiction, were not always adequately restricted while awaiting disposal
and SPHCs did not always maintain a list of CDS to verify against the disposal
vendor records.
Additionally, the SPHCs had not established adequate controls over the propriety
of payroll transactions. For example, the SPHCs were unable to provide
documentation that payroll adjustments had been reviewed prior to submission for
Statewide Personnel System processing. In addition, the SPHCs did not have
procedures in place to ensure the propriety of time recorded by timekeepers on
behalf of direct care workers who complete physical timesheets.
Furthermore, SGHC and CTPHC did not have adequate controls over collections
and funds. For example, CTPHC had not reconciled the aggregate balance of its
patient fund accounts against bank records. As of August 2022, we found the
aggregate fund balance exceeded the bank balance by $49,800.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings
contained in our preceding reports of the five SPHCs. We determined that two
CTPHC findings and one finding in the SGHC report are repeated in this report.
The remaining six findings were satisfactorily addressed by the respective
hospital center.
2

--- Page 5 ---
MDH Healthcare System’s response to this audit, on behalf of the SPHCs, is
included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings
and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by the SPHCs. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and the SPHC’s
willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective
actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The State Psychiatric Hospital Centers (SPHCs) did not 11
always use the appropriate payment method for certain contractual
services.
* Finding 2 – Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center (CTPHC) did not 12
adequately monitor its housekeeping vendor to ensure that services
totaling approximately $2.1 million were performed in accordance
with the related contract.
Pharmaceuticals
Finding 3 – The SPHCs did not ensure amounts paid for pharmaceutical 13
purchases were in accordance with contract terms.
Finding 4 – The SPHCs had not established adequate controls over 15
disposed controlled dangerous substances.
Payroll
Finding 5 – The SPHCs had not established adequate controls over 17
payroll and leave adjustments processed on the Statewide Personnel
System (SPS).
Finding 6 – The SPHCs did not have adequate procedures to ensure the 18
propriety of time recorded by timekeepers into SPS on behalf of direct
care employees.
Cash Receipts and Patient Funds
* Finding 7 – Both Spring Grove Hospital Center and CTPHC had not 19
established adequate accountability and control over certain collections
and funds.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 25
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of
March 2024
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) operates five State psychiatric
hospital centers (SPHCs).
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center (CTPHC) provides comprehensive
psychiatric evaluation and treatment services to individuals in a maximum
security environment.
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center
(ESHC) provides
Figure 1
comprehensive psychiatric
SPHC Details for Fiscal Year 2022
care and related services to
patients from the nine Average
Licensed
Hospital Location Daily
counties on Maryland's Capacity
Inpatients
Eastern Shore. The services
CTPHC Jessup 298 265
provided include inpatient
treatment and community ESHC Cambridge 84 82
service programs.
SGHC Catonsville 639 396
 Spring Grove Hospital
SHC Sykesville 522 240
Center (SGHC) provides a
wide range of TBFHC Cumberland 119 84
comprehensive mental
Total 1,662 1,067
health services to residents
Source: MDH records, State financial records
of Baltimore City, and
Baltimore and Harford Counties.
Furthermore, SGHC provides inpatient competency and criminal
responsibility evaluations and long-term inpatient and domiciliary care to
patients found not criminally responsible. In addition, SGHC provides
ancillary services to the Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, a joint
program between MDH and the University of Maryland, School of Medicine.
 Springfield Hospital Center (SHC) provides acute, sub-acute, and long-term
inpatient services for persons with mental illness throughout the State.
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center (TBFHC) provides mental health services to
adults throughout the State of Maryland.
The SPHCs are accredited by The Joint Commission, which evaluates and
monitors health care organizations nationwide to promote safe, high-quality care,
treatment, and services. As noted in Figure 1, during fiscal year 2022 these
facilities had a licensed total capacity of 1,662, and average daily inpatients of
7

--- Page 10 ---
1,067. Expenditures at these facilities in fiscal year 2022 totaled $326.8 million
(see Figure 2 for SPHC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources).
Figure 2
SPHC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
CTPHC ESHC SGHC SHC TBFHC
Full Time Equivalent Pos itions as of June 30, 2022
Filled 490 151 617 634 191 88.8%
Frozen1 1 0 2 1 0 0.2%
Vacant 71 27 97 60 4 11.0%
Total 562 178 716 695 195
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Salaries, Wages and
$70,996,216 $18,191,056 $83,556,398 $72,260,409 $20,122,421 81.2%
Fringe Benefits
Technical and
843,722 1,785,885 7,634,292 2,225,686 1,323,118 4.2%
Special Fees
Operating Expenses 9,822,546 3,809,430 18,482,793 11,246,506 4,408,413 14.6%
Total $81,662,484 $23,786,371 $109,673,483 $85,732,601 $25,853,952
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
General Fund $79,531,063 $23,262,898 $104,335,538 $83,839,985 $24,488,932 96.6%
Special Fund 10,525 163 2,247,153 121,271 947,904 1.0%
Federal Fund 26,551 0.0%
American Rescue
2,120,896 523,310 2,411,707 1771,345 417,116 2.2%
Plan Act of ‘21
Reimbursable Fund 652,534 0.2%
Total $81,662,484 $23,786,371 $109,673,483 $85,732,601 $25,853,952
Source: State financial and personnel records
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Frozen
positions were unauthorized to be filled according to budgetary instructions from the Department
of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not been filled
since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes
Effective May 31, 2019, MDH transferred oversight of the SPHCs from the
Behavioral Health Administration budgetary unit to the MDH Healthcare System
under the MDH Operations Administration budgetary unit. In our previous audits
of the SPHCs, we issued separate audit reports for each SPHC. In response to the
change in oversight and to promote audit efficiency, we have consolidated our
review of the SPHCs into one audit. Consequently, our audit report
recommendations will be made to the MDH Healthcare System.
A listing of the most recent Office of Legislative Audits’ fiscal compliance audits
of MDH units performed during the current audit cycle can be found in Exhibit 1
of this report.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report of CTPHC dated March 17, 2020; the one finding
contained in our preceding audit report of ESHC dated November 19, 2018; the
four findings contained in our preceding audit report of SGHC dated April 22,
2020; the one finding contained in our preceding audit report of SHC dated
December 6, 2018; and the one finding contained in our preceding audit report of
TBFHC dated March 26, 2019.
As disclosed in Figure 3 on the following page, we determined that the SPHCs
collectively satisfactorily addressed six of these nine findings. The remaining
three findings are repeated in this report and appear as two findings.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
CTPHC
CTPHC did not adequately monitor its housekeeping vendor to
Repeated
Finding 1 ensure that services totaling approximately $4.2 million were
(Current Finding 2)
performed in accordance with the contract.
CTPHC did not reconcile the balance of its patient fund accounts
Repeated
Finding 2 with the corresponding records maintained by the Comptroller of
(Current Finding 7)
Maryland.
ESHC
ESHC did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the
Finding 1 propriety of time recorded by one individual into the Statewide Not repeated
Personnel System on behalf of numerous other employees.
SGHC
The invitation for bid for the purchase of dietary equipment costing
Finding 1 Not repeated
$800,000 appeared to be tailored to a particular vendor.
SGHC circumvented State procurement regulations and MDH
procurement policies by artificially dividing procurements for
goods and services to keep them under certain solicitation and
Finding 2 Not repeated
delegation thresholds. In addition, SGHC did not always
competitively procure or verify amounts paid on certain purchases,
resulting in certain questionable activity and overpayments.
SGHC hired six summer interns who were family members of
Finding 3 SGHC employees, including a management employee involved in Not repeated
the intern-hiring process.
SGHC did not effectively safeguard and account for its collections Repeated
Finding 4
and ensure collections were deposited. (Current Finding 7)
SHC
SHC did not procure fresh produce and certain medical supplies in
Finding 1 Not repeated
accordance with State procurement regulations and MDH policies.
TBFHC
TBFHC did not use an available statewide contract and/or
Finding 1 competitively procure fuel and security equipment, in accordance Not repeated
with State regulations.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
The State Psychiatric Hospital Centers (SPHCs) did not always use the
appropriate payment method for certain contractual services.
Analysis
The SPHCs did not always use the appropriate payment method for certain
contractual services. Based on State records, our review of the approximately
$60.4 million in contractual service payments which were made during each
SPHC’s respective current audit period, disclosed that $28.7 million or 47 percent
were made using the direct payment method. The direct payment method, which
was used by each of the five SPHCs, bypasses the critical automated document
matching control found in other payment methods. Specifically, the direct
payment method does not include the control of matching an invoice to the
corresponding contract/purchase order prior to payment, to ensure amounts paid
are consistent with the related contract and do not exceed contract maximums.
Our review of seven payments, using the direct payment method relating to three
of the SPHCs and totaling approximately $574,000, found that for five payments
totaling $455,300, the services were received and the amounts paid were
consistent with the related contracts/purchase orders. The remaining two
payments, totaling $118,700 related to the housekeeping contract in which the
related services were not adequately monitored (see Finding 2).
The Department of Information Technology’s Internal Control and Security
Policy and Procedures Manual restricts the direct payment method to specific
types of transactions, such as utilities, tuition reimbursements, or travel. We
determined that the aforementioned $28.7 million payments did not include the
allowable types of transactions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) Healthcare
System ensure that the SPHCs use the payment method that provides the
most appropriate measure of processing controls in accordance with State
policy.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center (CTPHC) did not adequately monitor its
housekeeping vendor to ensure that services totaling approximately $2.1
million were performed in accordance with the related contract.
Analysis
CTPHC did not adequately monitor its housekeeping vendor to ensure that
services were performed in accordance with the contract. The services under the
current vendor were procured by the Department of General Services (DGS) on
behalf of CTPHC and covered the period of August 2019 through July 2024 for a
total contract value of $3.6 million. CTPHC is responsible for monitoring vendor
performance by conducting inspections of housekeeping services, and for making
the related vendor payments. As of June 30, 2022, expenditures on the contract to
date totaled $2.1 million.
 CTPHC could not document that it conducted the required inspections prior to
December 2021 and did not perform 10 of 13 inspections for the period
December 2021 through September 2022. Further, CTPHC personnel advised
that the three inspections performed were not conducted in the presence of the
vendor, which is contrary to contract requirements. Finally, when inspections
were performed, CTPHC did not communicate problems identified during the
inspections in writing to the vendor.
 CTPHC did not take action when the inspections identified that services were
not being performed as required by the contract. Specifically, one inspection
performed in August 2022 identified ten deficiencies, such as insufficient
staffing, which CTPHC believed contributed to unsatisfactory performance.
The contract provides for reducing the payments by two percent for any
uncorrected or a repetitive deficiency. However, since the required routine
inspections were not performed, CTPHC was unable to determine whether the
deficiencies were ongoing (that is, repetitive) nor was it in a position to
determine if payment reductions were warranted.
Similar conditions regarding inadequate monitoring of the prior housekeeping
vendor were commented upon in our preceding CTPHC audit report. In response
to that report, CTPHC indicated that it would establish procedures to perform
monthly inspections in the presence of the vendor effective December 2019,
develop a checklist to ensure that the vendor performs all tasks per the contract,
and document communications with the vendor through a dedicated email
address. We were advised by CTPHC personnel that procedures were not
established, and the inspections were not implemented for the new vendor
because of insufficient CTPHC staffing.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System ensure CTPHC
adequately monitor its housekeeping vendor. Specifically, we recommend
that the MDH Healthcare System ensure CTPHC
a. perform documented inspections of the housekeeping vendor in
accordance with the contract to ensure all required services were
provided (repeat),
b. report any deficiencies noted during the inspection to the vendor (repeat),
and
c. apply the allowed two percent reduction on invoices for uncorrected or
repetitive deficiencies.
Pharmaceuticals
Finding 3
The SPHCs did not ensure amounts paid for pharmaceutical purchases were
in accordance with contract terms.
Analysis
The SPHCs did not ensure amounts paid for pharmaceutical purchases were
consistent with the related contracts. According to State records, during each
respective SPHC’s current audit period, the SPHCs pharmaceutical expenditures
totaled approximately $20.2 million (see Figure 4). DGS entered into an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement for pharmaceutical
purchases which was utilized by each of the SPHCs. The rates charged to the
SPHCs for pharmaceuticals were based on a price list in the vendor’s system that
changed weekly.
13

--- Page 16 ---
CTPHC, Eastern Shore Hospital Center Figure 4
(ESHC), Spring Grove Hospital Center SPHC Pharmaceutical
(SGHC), and Springfield Hospital Expenditures
Center (SHC) did not determine the During Current Audit
accuracy of pharmaceutical charges in Periods
accordance with the agreement’s Hospital Pharmaceutical
pricing process. Furthermore, although Center Purchases
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center CTPHC $4,603,951
(TBFHC) compared amounts billed to
ESHC 1,846,722
the vendor price list on a test basis, it
SGHC 5,838,653
did not document the actions taken
SHC 5,859,360
when the vendor lacked support for the
TBFHC 2,007,258
specific amounts billed. Our test of the
Total $20,155,944
387 pharmaceuticals purchased for the
Source: State financial records
month of June 2022 by all SPHCs,
totaling approximately $430,100, disclosed that 144 pharmaceuticals with billed
charges totaling $115,000 (27 percent) could not be verified for accuracy because
the SPHCs did not obtain a complete price list weekly from the vendor. The
$115,000 included charges from each of the five SPHCs. For example, two
SPHCs made 15 purchases of one medicine, with an average charge of $852 per
dose totaling approximately $12,800, without the price of the specific medicine
being listed on the price list. Since the SPHCs did not adequately compare the
accuracy of prices charged, they were unaware that price lists were incomplete.
The Comptroller of Maryland's Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over disbursements including the
verification of invoice documentation to procurement documents to ensure the
propriety of billings.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. ensure that amounts paid by SPHCs for pharmaceutical purchases are in
accordance with the related contract, including comprehensive weekly
vendor price lists; and
b. document the actions taken when the vendor lacks support for the
specific amounts billed.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 4
The SPHCs had not established adequate controls over disposed controlled
dangerous substances.
Analysis
The SPHCs had not established adequate controls over disposed controlled
dangerous substances (CDS). CDS are drugs or other substances that are tightly
regulated by the federal government under the Controlled Substances Act because
they may be abused or cause addiction including opioids, stimulants, depressants,
hallucinogens, and anabolic steroids. When CDS are to be disposed (such as
when no longer needed) they are removed from the SPHC inventory and picked
up by a vendor who reimburses the SPHC for certain CDS. According to vendor
records, during fiscal year 2022 the five SPHCs’ expenditures for CDS totaled
$125,600.
We reviewed disposal of CDS at each of the five SPHCs and found that each
SPHC had deficiencies in at least two key controls, such as employee access to
CDS not being restricted (see Figure 5 on the following page). Consequently,
there was a lack of assurance that all CDS was properly disposed and applicable
reimbursements were received. For example, our test of five disposals at two
SPHCs found that perpetual inventory records at one SPHC did not always
document the removal of drugs reported by the vendor. At the other SPHC,
inventory disposal records were not available to compare to vendor records of
disposals.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 5
Summary of Inadequate Internal Controls
Description of Inadequate Hospital Center
Internal Controls
CTPHC ESHC SGHC SHC TBFHC
SPHC did not restrict access to
  
CDS awaiting disposal
SPHC did not maintain a list of
CDS removed from inventory   
awaiting disposal
SPHC did not review vendor
disposal records to ensure all CDS     
were accounted for.
SPHC did not verify that amount
refunded by vendor for returned     
CDS was received and proper.
Total Inadequate Internal
4 3 4 2 3
Controls
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System establish comprehensive
procedures and controls over disposed CDS. Specifically, we recommend
that the MDH Healthcare Systems
a. ensure that CDS are maintained in a secure, restricted location until
collected by the vendor;
b. maintain a comprehensive listing of CDS removed from inventory
awaiting disposal and reconciled to vendor records; and
c. ensure all applicable refunds are received and properly applied.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Payroll
Finding 5
The SPHCs had not established adequate controls over payroll and leave
adjustments processed on the Statewide Personnel System (SPS).
Analysis
The SPHCs had not established adequate controls over payroll and leave balance
adjustments on the SPS. During the timeframe of each of the five SPHCs’
respective audit periods, collectively the SPHCs processed 4,002 payroll
adjustments (such as retroactive payroll payments) that changed employee pay by
a total of approximately $1.32 million (increase of $1.2 million and decrease of
$120,000), and 5,238 leave adjustments (such as leave bank enrollments) that
changed employee leave balances by 170,100 hours (increase of 118,900 hours
and decrease of 51,200 hours).
 The SPHCs did not have a procedure to verify the propriety of payroll
adjustments prior to or following submission to the MDH Office of Human
Resources (OHR) for processing in SPS. Our test of 12 SPHC payroll
adjustments (with at least one from each SPHC) totaling approximately
$153,300, disclosed that there was no documented independent review and
approval for all 12 adjustments and no support for 6 of the adjustments
totaling $121,600. Our review of the remaining 6 payroll adjustments
disclosed that the adjustments appeared proper.
 The SPHCs did not have a procedure to verify the propriety of leave balance
adjustments made by SPHC employees directly in SPS or by OHR on behalf
of the SPHCs. Our test of 11 leave balance adjustments for 3,197 hours
processed by the SPHCs (with at least one from each SPHC) disclosed that
there was no independent review documented for all adjustments tested and 4
adjustments totaling 836 hours were either not supported or were not
corrected. For example, one person was awarded 632 hours of sick leave
without support to justify the adjustment.
As a result of these conditions, there is a lack of assurance that the SPHCs’
payroll and leave adjustments recorded in SPS were authorized adjustments.
Prudent business practices dictate that a documented, independent review of
payroll and leave adjustments should be made for validity, completeness,
authorization, accuracy, and proper classification.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System establish procedures to
a. ensure that payroll and leave adjustments are reviewed and approved by
independent supervisory personnel, and that this approval is
documented;
b. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance
adjustments to ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed
and investigate the propriety of discrepancies; and
c. maintain supporting documentation for payroll and leave adjustments.
Finding 6
The SPHCs did not have adequate procedures to ensure the propriety of time
recorded by timekeepers into SPS on behalf of direct care employees.
Analysis
The SPHCs did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the propriety of
time recorded by timekeepers in SPS on behalf of 1,411 direct care employees2.
Direct care employees recorded their time on physical timesheets which were
approved by their supervisors. These approved physical timesheets were
provided to timekeepers to record in SPS, where they were subject to a final
approval to ensure propriety of posting. However, individuals responsible for
electronically approving the records posted to SPS did not review the physical
timesheets as part of the review and approval process. Because of this condition,
there was a lack of assurance that the time recorded in SPS for these employees
was proper. According to the State’s records, payroll-related expenditures of the
SPHCs totaled approximately $279 million during fiscal year 2022. In calendar
year 2022 payroll expenditures related to direct care employees totaled
approximately $102.4 million.
We tested time entries for one pay period in fiscal years 2021 and 2022 for 18
direct care employees among the five SPHCs whose time was entered by a
timekeeper. Our test disclosed 9 instances of unsupported differences, at four
SPHCs, between hours recorded in SPS and the hours on the corresponding
physical timesheet. For example, we noted 4 individuals with an additional
combined 15.1 overtime hours added to SPS that were not supported by the
physical timesheet (ranging from 0.5 hours to 7.25 hours). Applicable SPHC
management personnel were unable to explain these differences. While these
differences were relatively insignificant, they support the need for an adequate
2 Direct care employees are 24/7 shift workers who are in charge of taking care of the patients.
18

--- Page 21 ---
verification of time recorded by timekeepers to supporting documentation
(supervisor approved physical timesheets).
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. ensure that the individuals responsible for electronically approving the
records posted to SPS review the approved physical timesheets as part of
the review and approval process, and
b. review the aforementioned time records and take appropriate corrective
action for any unsupported time posted to SPS.
Cash Receipts and Patient Funds
Finding 7
Both SGHC and CTPHC had not established adequate accountability and
control over certain collections and funds.
Analysis
SGHC and CTPHC had not established adequate accountability and control over
certain collections and funds. Consequently, errors or other discrepancies could
occur without timely detection. Specifically, our review disclosed the following
conditions:
Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC)
 SGHC did not perform documented independent verifications that collections
were deposited using the initial record of receipt. Our test of collections for
15 days between April 2019 and April 2022, totaling approximately $96,100,
disclosed SGHC could not document that deposit verifications had been
performed for any of the days tested. A similar condition regarding SGHC
not using the initial record of receipt was commented upon in our three
preceding SGHC audit reports dating back to 2012. In its response to the
most recent report, SGHC stated a newly appointed Accounts Clerk
Supervisor had begun to perform an independent verification; however, this
position has been vacant as of August 2021 and SGHC did not assign this
responsibility to other employees. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Procedure Manual requires an independent verification of collections from
the initial point of recordation to amounts deposited.
 SGHC did not establish sufficient accountability over and restrict access to
collections. Specifically, separate cash drawers and individual userids were
19

--- Page 22 ---
not used by the two employees in the Patient Funds3 Office to establish
accountability over the funds received. In addition, checks received by mail
and forwarded to the Patient Funds Office from other SGHC locations were
left in an unsecured location accessible to any SGHC Finance Office
employee prior to deposit preparation. Furthermore, collections were stored
in an unlocked safe prior to deposit accessible to all 11 employees in the
Finance Office. The aforementioned Manual requires separate cash drawers
and other similar controls for each employee to affix individual responsibility
and accountability over collections until deposit. The Manual also requires
adequate facilities to store and safeguard collections until deposit.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding SGHC audit
report. In its response to that report, SGHC indicated that a separate secure
cash drawer had been installed in the Patient Fund Office as of June 30, 2020
and it was preparing a policy for the use of separate cash drawers and userids.
Further, SGHC responded that no more than three individuals would have
access to the safe, implying it would be locked. As of March 2024, SGHC
indicated that staff turnover in the Patient Fund Office has delayed
implementation of a new policy.
According to State records, SGHC cash receipt collections processed during the
audit period totaled $2.7 million, including patient funds totaling $386,800.
Clifton T Perkins Hospital Center (CTPHC)
CTPHC did not reconcile its patient fund accounts with the corresponding bank
records, as required by the aforementioned Manual. Our review disclosed that, as
of August 31, 2022, the aggregate patient fund account balance according to
CTPHC's automated records ($336,600) exceeded the corresponding bank records
($286,800) by $49,800. CTPHC could not readily explain this difference. In
addition, CTPHC had not obtained the Comptroller of Maryland reports to
reconcile with automated patient fund accounts and bank records. Consequently,
assurance was lacking that CTPHC’s patient fund records were accurate.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that finding CTPHC advised that it would continue to investigate
differences and was continuing to perform monthly reconciliations. However,
CTPHC was not able to provide documentation of reconciliations during our audit
period.
3 Patient funds include amounts earned by or received on behalf of the SPHC’s patients.
Patients may use these funds for certain discretionary purchases or may direct the SPHC to
pay the funds to third parties. It is the SPHC’s responsibility to maintain accurate records
on behalf of its patients.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare ensure that
a. SGHC perform an independent deposit verification for all collections
using the initial record of receipt (repeat);
b. SGHC implement separate cash drawers and userids for all cashiers
(repeat);
c. SGHC restrict access to collections prior to preparation of the deposit
and restrict access to the safe to only those employees who require access
to perform their assigned job duties (repeat); and
d. CTPHC reconcile the aggregate balance of its patient fund accounts with
the corresponding records maintained by the bank and Comptroller of
Maryland and investigate any differences, including the one noted above
(repeat).
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH):
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center (CTPHC) for the period beginning
May 15, 2019 and ending June 30, 2022,
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) for the period beginning May 21,
2018 and ending June 30, 2022,
 Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC) for the period beginning February
19, 2019 and ending June 30, 2022,
 Springfield Hospital Center (SHC) for the period beginning May 30, 2018
and ending June 30, 2022, and
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center (TBFHC) for the period beginning
October 22, 2018 and ending June 30, 2022.
These units are collectively referred to as the State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
(SPHCs).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the respective
SPHC’s financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain procurements and disbursements for
operating expenditures, corporate purchasing cards, cash receipts, materials and
supplies, and certain payroll activities. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit reports of CTPHC, ESHC, SGHC, SHC,
and TBFHC.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the SPHCs by
MDH - Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll
and purchasing functions, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
22

--- Page 25 ---
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MDH - Office of the
Secretary and Other Units.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period, as detailed above for the SPHCs audited, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of operations at the SPHCs. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from the controlled dangerous substances vendor for the
purpose of testing disposals. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Under the MDH Healthcare System, a part of the MDH Operations
Administration, the SPHCs’ managements are responsible for establishing and
23

--- Page 26 ---
maintaining effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of
financial records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including
safeguarding of assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there
are five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment,
control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the
five components, when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the
SPHCs, were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the SPHCs’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the SPHCs that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the MDH Healthcare System, on behalf of the SPHCs, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its
response.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of March 2024 (Page 1 of 2)
Date of Most
Name of Audit Programs Covered Recent Audit
Report
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review Commission
1 Health Regulatory Commissions 01/25/2024
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
Managed Care Program, known as HealthChoice
Medical Care Programs Administration –
2 including oversight of the nine private Managed Care 12/14/2023
Managed Care Program
Organizations
3 Medical Care Programs Administration Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/2023
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director for
Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental Disabilities
4 Office of the Secretary and Other Units 10/19/2023
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing and
Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
5 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 5/10/23
 Western Maryland Center
6 Developmental Disabilities Administration Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Behavioral Health Administration and  Behavioral Health Administration
Medical Care Programs Administration -  Medical Care Programs Administration
7 10/25/22
Administrative Service Organization for Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral
Behavioral Health Services Health Services
 Holly Center
 Potomac Center
8 Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers 10/24/22
 Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment
Program
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and
Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
9 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents –
Baltimore
10 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
 Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Prevention and Health Promotion  Office of Population Health Improvement
Administration Office of Population Health  Office of Preparedness and Response
11 Improvement Office of Preparedness and  Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation – 02/23/21
Response, and Office of Provider Engagement Office of Controlled Substances Administration
and Regulation  Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation –
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
 22 Health Professional Boards and Commissions
12 Regulatory Services 01/19/21
 The Office of Health Care Quality
13 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20
25

--- Page 28 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of March 2024 (Page 2 of 2)
Date of Most
Name of Audit Programs Covered Recent Audit
Report
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
14 Pharmacy Services  Kidney Disease Program 08/31/20
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and
Treatment Program
15 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 04/10/20
26

--- Page 29 ---
APPENDIX
May 15, 2024
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of
Health – State Psychiatric Hospital Centers with the following units for the periods noted:
• Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center (CTPHC) for the period beginning May 15, 2019, and
ending June 30, 2022,
• Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) for the period beginning May 21, 2018, and
ending June 30, 2022,
• Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC) for the period beginning February 19, 2019, and
ending June 30, 2022,
• Springfield Hospital Center (SHC) for the period beginning May 30, 2018, and ending
June 30, 2022, and
• Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center (TBFHC) for the period beginning October 22, 2018
and ending June 30, 2022.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Laura Herrera Scott, MD, MPH
Secretary
Enclosures
Erin K. McMullen, Chief of Staff, MDH
Marie Grant, Assistant Secretary for Health Policy, MDH
Emily Berg, Deputy Chief of Staff, MDH

--- Page 30 ---
Bryan I. Mroz, Deputy Secretary, Operations, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
Annie C. Olle, Director, State Hospital Administration
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Audit Supervisor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
2

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
The State Psychiatric Hospital Centers (SPHCs) did not always use the
appropriate payment method for certain contractual services.
We recommend that the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) Healthcare
System ensure that the SPHCs use the payment method that provides the
most appropriate measure of processing controls in accordance with State
policy.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/23
Please provide details of The MDH Healthcare System has developed additional training for staff
corrective action or as well as regular reviews by the Healthcare System Chief Financial
explain disagreement. Officer to ensure proper processing of payments in accordance with the
State Policy.
Additionally, the MDH Healthcare System Chief Financial Officer meets
with the individual facilities’ fiscal team each month to provide
guidance, review processes, and to provide training and technical
assistance as needed. Included in these monthly team meetings is a
check to ensure that State policy procedures are being followed. A
checklist for the facilities’ fiscal teams has been developed to ensure that
financial tasks are completed appropriately each month. Quarterly
Page 1 of 12

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
operations reviews take place with each facility to ensure financial
procedures are being followed and process control is in place.
Finding 2
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center (CTPHC) did not adequately monitor its
housekeeping vendor to ensure that services totaling approximately $2.1
million were performed in accordance with the related contract.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System ensure CTPHC
adequately monitor its housekeeping vendor. Specifically, we recommend
that the MDH Healthcare System ensure CTPHC
a. perform documented inspections of the housekeeping vendor in
accordance with the contract to ensure all required services were
provided (repeat),
b. report any deficiencies noted during the inspection to the vendor (repeat),
and
c. apply the allowed two percent reduction on invoices for uncorrected or
repetitive deficiencies.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/22
Page 2 of 12

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Routine inspections to assess vendor performance are occuring,
corrective action or including rounding and cleanliness checks by the environment of care
explain disagreement. department. The MDH Healthcare System in coordination with CTPHC
will continue to monitor vendor performance as required by the contract
and the Maryland Procurement Manual and ensure that these inspections
are documented in accordance with the contract.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/22
Please provide details of Routine inspections to assess vendor performance are occuring. The
corrective action or MDH Healthcare System in coordination with CTPHC will continue to
explain disagreement. monitor vendor performance as required by the contract and the
Maryland Procurement Manual and ensure that these inspections are
documented in accordance with the contract. Any deficiencies will be
reported to the vendor.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/23
Please provide details of The steps outlined above that the MDH Healthcare System has in place
corrective action or ensures that the vendor is notified of any deficiencies. If deficiencies are
explain disagreement. identified the 2% reductions will be applied.
Pharmaceuticals
Finding 3
The SPHCs did not ensure amounts paid for pharmaceutical purchases were
in accordance with contract terms.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. ensure that amounts paid by SPHCs for pharmaceutical purchases are in
accordance with the related contract, including comprehensive weekly
vendor price lists; and
Page 3 of 12

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
b. document the actions taken when the vendor lacks support for the
specific amounts billed.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/1/23
Please provide details of The Chief Financial Officer of the MDH Healthcare System will assist
corrective action or with monitoring this pharmacy contract for the SPHCs. The CFO will
explain disagreement. review invoices for accuracy against the contract before approving
invoices for payment.
Up until April 1, 2021 all pharmacy vendor invoices were audited by a
3rd party vendor. The contract was not renewed.
The SPHC invoice auditing process is done in-house by the pharmacy
program in conjunction with the facility’s fiscal team. Invoiced prices
charged are compared with the contracted price. If a discrepancy is
found, the team works with the pharmacy vendor to resolve the
discrepancy. This follow up is tracked via spreadsheet and can be
supplied.
Starting August 2023, the MDH facilities started receiving a monthly
report of the pricing audit conducted by the SPHCs. This will be
reviewed by the Pharmacy, fiscal departments, and MDH Healthcare
System CFO.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/24
Page 4 of 12

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The MDH Healthcare System is currently developing a standard
corrective action or operating procedure to ensure documentation of the actions taken when
explain disagreement. the vendor lacks support for the specific amounts billed.
Finding 4
The SPHCs had not established adequate controls over disposed controlled
dangerous substances.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System establish comprehensive
procedures and controls over disposed CDS. Specifically, we recommend
that the MDH Healthcare Systems
a. ensure that CDS are maintained in a secure, restricted location until
collected by the vendor;
b. maintain a comprehensive listing of CDS removed from inventory
awaiting disposal and reconciled to vendor records; and
c. ensure all applicable refunds are received and properly applied.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/24
Please provide details The MDH Healthcare System SPHCs,, will document a procedure that
of corrective action or ensures controlled dangerous substances (CDS) that are expired/damaged
explain disagreement. are removed from inventory and recorded in control substance logs both
on physical paper and/or electronically. The CDS that are
expired/damaged are stored in a locked area within the pharmacy in a
Page 5 of 12

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
separate location from the non-expired/damaged inventory until it can be
collected by the vendor. The SPHCs will all ensure appropriate access
control to all CDS and will ensure only appropriate personnel have
access to such areas.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/24
Please provide details The MDH Healthcare System, including SPHCs, will maintain a
of corrective action or comprehensive listing (including drug name, strength, dosage form, and
explain disagreement. quantity) of CDS removed from inventory awaiting disposal and
reconciled to vendor records. All CDS are recorded upon receipt from
the supplier into inventory both electronically and/or physically. All CDS
are checked monthly by rotating staff for accurate inventory and
recorded. When CDS is removed from inventory, it is recorded both
physically and/or electronically by two separate staff members and
placed out of normal inventory until it can be picked up by the vendor.
The vendor's website is available to track the product's return & refund
status, if applicable (received, processed, invoiced, credited, destroyed).
The removal from inventory is confirmed with the vendor who provides
a listing when the CDS is picked up for disposal. The pharmacy list and
the vendor list are both reviewed and reconciled by the pharmacy.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/24
Please provide details The MDH Healthcare System SPHCs will document a procedure that
of corrective action or ensures that all CDS that have been separated from normal inventory are
explain disagreement. currently logged both physically and/or electronically until disposal
vendor arrives. At that time, the vendor will count all CDS, reconcile and
invoice against records in the pharmacy, then CDS are secured in a
shipping container and sent out to the vendor. For all schedule 2
medications, a DEA 222 record is generated at the time of transfer to the
vendor. All other CDS records are also generated at the time of shipping
and kept both physically and/or electronically. Once the vendor receives
inventory, CDS is recorded as received and maintained until disposal or
credit occurs. Pharmacy keeps copies of records for disposal/credits both
physically and/or electronically and the Fiscal office keeps records of
Page 6 of 12

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
any credit invoices on file as well. Once the pharmacy receives the credit
invoice from the vendor, this invoice is forwarded to Fiscal. Fiscal
completes a reconciliation between the invoices.
Payroll
Finding 5
The SPHCs had not established adequate controls over payroll and leave
adjustments processed on the Statewide Personnel System (SPS).
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System establish procedures to
a. ensure that payroll and leave adjustments are reviewed and approved by
independent supervisory personnel, and that this approval is
documented;
b. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance
adjustments to ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed
and investigate the propriety of discrepancies; and
c. maintain supporting documentation for payroll and leave adjustments.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2024
Page 7 of 12

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The MDH Office of Human Resources has recently created and
corrective action or implemented standard operating procedures at the Headquarters level for
explain disagreement. leave and payroll adjustment review. The SOPs fully cover the review of
all such adjustments by HQ Payroll supervisory personnel and leadership
(up to and including the Chief of Payroll). Payroll leadership reviews all
such transactions and audits the documentation for leave adjustments in
a 10% random sampling. This sampling percentage is consistent with
general auditing practices. All documentation for pay adjustments are
reviewed by Payroll leadership. These reviews are documented in shared
drives for future review and auditing as necessary. Rollout of these
policies and procedures to the healthcare facilities is imminent, and after
an implementation period allowing for minor adjustments each
individual facility may have, will be in effect at the facility level. Payroll
leadership of each facility will be conducting the reviews as described
above and will be documenting appropriately. MDH HQ Payroll will
conduct random audits of the facilities to ensure compliance.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2024
Please provide details of The MDH Office of Human Resources will independently verify SPS
corrective action or output reports of payroll and leave balance adjustments to ensure only
explain disagreement. authorized adjustments had been processed and investigate the propriety
of discrepancies. In addition, the MDH Office of Human Resources will
ensure documentation will be stored for all such payroll and leave
adjustments. As part of the supervisory review process above,
documentation for these adjustments will be reviewed secondarily by
payroll leadership in each facility, and, through random sampling, at
MDH HQ Payroll.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2024
Please provide details of The MDH Office of Human Resources will ensure documentation will
corrective action or be stored for all such payroll and leave adjustments. As part of the
explain disagreement. supervisory review process above, documentation for these adjustments
will be reviewed secondarily by payroll leadership in each facility, and,
through random sampling, at MDH HQ Payroll.
Page 8 of 12

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
The SPHCs did not have adequate procedures to ensure the propriety of time
recorded by timekeepers into SPS on behalf of direct care employees.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. ensure that the individuals responsible for electronically approving the
records posted to SPS review the approved physical timesheets as part of
the review and approval process, and
b. review the aforementioned time records and take appropriate corrective
action for any unsupported time posted to SPS.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH Payroll HQ will be issuing communications to each MDH
corrective action or Healthcare System facility requiring the development and submission of
explain disagreement. an SOP or other equivalent policy which includes mandatory review of
physical timesheets by payroll approvers in facilities. To allow for
individual facility operational differences, each facility may present a
process which works best for them, providing it meets all standards set
by MDH Payroll HQ, including the above-mentioned maintenance and
usage of physical timesheets by timekeepers and timekeeper approvers.
All such timesheets will be properly stored for future review and audit as
necessary.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2024
Page 9 of 12

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The MDH Healthcare System facilities will conduct a review of the
corrective action or potential erroneous timesheet approvals with MDH HQ Payroll
explain disagreement. oversight. Should erroneous payments be discovered, MDH HQ Payroll
will, in tandem with the facility, take the appropriate corrective action to
recover funds as required.
Cash Receipts and Patient Funds
Finding 7
Both SGHC and CTPHC had not established adequate accountability and
control over certain collections and funds.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare ensure that
a. SGHC perform an independent deposit verification for all collections
using the initial record of receipt (repeat);
b. SGHC implement separate cash drawers and userids for all cashiers
(repeat);
c. SGHC restrict access to collections prior to preparation of the deposit
and restrict access to the safe to only those employees who require access
to perform their assigned job duties (repeat); and
d. CTPHC reconciles the aggregate balance of its patient fund accounts with
the corresponding records maintained by the bank and Comptroller of
Maryland and investigate any differences, including the one noted above
(repeat).
Page 10 of 12

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/24
Please provide details of The task of independent deposit verification for all collections using the
corrective action or initial record of receipt will be assigned to the individual in the
explain disagreement. Accountant II position in the Finance department. The position was
filled on January 10, 2024. All FY 2023 and FY 2024 verification
processes will be completed as of 06/30/2024.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/14/23
Please provide details of The Finance Department has documented a procure to ensure the
corrective action or following controls are implemented and maintained.
explain disagreement. SGHC has multiple lockable cash drawers at the Finance department.
One cashier in the Cash Receipts section of the department handles
cash/drawers. A separate secure cash drawer, with an imprest
cash/change funds for four hundred dollars ($400), is kept in the safe.
On an as needed basis the backup cashier at the patient cash window can
access it. Separate user IDs are used by the cashiers operating the
independent program for the patient accounting.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/24
Please provide details of Currently all checks received for deposits are secured in the cash
corrective action or drawers, restricting unauthorized access until deposited to the bank. The
explain disagreement. newly hired Office Secretary III now receives all mailed in collections,
endorse, and record them in the check log and deliver them to the cashier
for further processing for the bank deposit.
Recommendation 7d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/24
Page 11 of 12

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Department of Health –
State Psychiatric Hospital Centers
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Springfield Hospital Center and
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The MDH Healthcare System in coordination with CTPHC reconciles
corrective action or the balance and provides an adjustment journal entry to reconcile the
explain disagreement. aggregate balance maintained by the bank and the Comptroller.
Reconciliation was completed and CTPHC will ensure monthly balance
reconciliation with the bank records and the comptroller records. Also,
CTPHC has reconciled the aggregate balance of its patient fund accounts
with the corresponding records maintained by the bank and Comptroller
of Maryland as at 12/31/22 and 12/31/2023. An investigation of the
differences from 2020 through 2022 is still ongoing, after the
investigation a JE will be done in FMIS for the differences of $62k
before FY24 closeout.
Page 12 of 12

--- Page 43 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Owen M. Long-Grant
Chau D. Mai
Ibijoke O. Owolabi, CPA
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Staff Auditors