Title: Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Education
Date: 05/30/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6659cbc94a223709beeda1b2
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:07:07.581533
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Education
May 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 30, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Office of the
Inspector General for Education (OIGE) for the period beginning June 1, 2019
and ending November 30, 2023. The OIGE is an independent unit of the State
responsible for examining and investigating complaints or information regarding
the management and affairs of local boards of education, local school systems,
public schools, nonpublic schools that receive State funds, the Maryland State
Department of Education, and the Interagency Commission on School
Construction. Specifically, the law provides that the OIGE may receive and
investigate information and complaints concerning potential fraud, waste, and
abuse of public funds and property; civil rights violations involving students or
employees; whether policies and procedures governing the prevention and
reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with applicable federal and State
laws; and compliance with other applicable federal and State laws.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
OIGE.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Effective June 1, 2019, Chapter 771, Laws of Maryland 2019, created the
Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE) as an
independent unit of the State. The Inspector General was jointly appointed by the
Governor, the Attorney General, and the State Treasurer on February 17, 2020,
and confirmed by the Senate of Maryland on March 17, 2020.
The OIGE is responsible for examining and investigating complaints or
information regarding the management and affairs of local boards of education,
local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools that receive State funds,
the Maryland State Department of Education, and the Interagency Commission on
School Construction. Specifically, the law provides that the OIGE may receive
and investigate information and complaints concerning potential fraud, waste, and
abuse of public funds and property; civil rights
Figure 1
violations involving students or employees;
Annual Number of
whether policies and procedures governing the
prevention and reporting of child abuse and Complaints Received
neglect comply with applicable federal and Reporting Complaints
State laws; and compliance with other Period Received
applicable federal and State laws. 2020 40
2021 136
The OIGE initiates examinations and 2022 122
investigations based on its assessment of 2023 253
complaints and information it receives from Total 551
various sources, including State and outside
Source: The OIGE Annual Reports
agencies and through its fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline. The OIGE also conducts an
annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and procedures
governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with
applicable federal and State laws.
The law further provides that the OIGE is to publish an annual report on or before
December 1st each year. According to the annual reports for reporting periods of
December 1st to November 30th for 2020 to 2023, the OIGE has received 551
complaints (see Figure 1), and during the 2023 reporting period, 249 complaints
had been closed, 13 had been elevated to an investigation, and 2 had been
assigned for an investigative audit. According to State records, during fiscal year
2023, the OIGE’s expenditures totaled $2 million, of which approximately $1.7
million was for salaries, wages, and fringe benefits (see Figure 2 on next page).
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 2
The OIGE Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 10 83.3%
Vacant 2 16.7%
Total 12
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $1,693,022 84.8%
Technical and Special Fees 20,142 1.0%
Operating Expenses 282,395 14.2%
Total $1,995,559
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $1,995,559 100.0%
Total $1,995,559
Source: State financial and personnel records
Independent Peer Review
The OIGE is subject to a periodic independent peer review by the Association of
Inspector General (AIG). In May 2024, representatives from AIG conducted an
independent peer review to evaluate the work of the OIGE. According to the
independent peer review report dated May 14, 2024, the OIGE met all current and
relevant AIG standards for the review period from December 1, 2020 to
November 30, 2023 and there were no reportable instances of failure to meet the
AIG standards.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Education’s (OIGE) internal
control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings that did not
warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to the OIGE.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the OIGE. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Office of the
Inspector General for Education (OIGE) for the period beginning June 1, 2019
and ending November 30, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the OIGE’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included oversight of complaints received by the OIGE.
Our audit did not include certain support services (such as human resources,
payroll processing activities, purchasing, invoice processing, and other fiscal
functions) provided to the OIGE by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE). These support services are included within the scope of our audits of
the MSDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
5

--- Page 8 ---
period of June 1, 2019 to November 30, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the OIGE’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). These extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
was sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We
also extracted data from the OIGE’s case management tracking system for the
purpose of testing complaint processing. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the
purposes of our audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The OIGE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the OIGE, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
6

--- Page 9 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Audit Senior