Title: Maryland Department of Health - Laboratories Administration
Date: 06/05/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=665f7563c13a27638773be30
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:07:19.077594
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Laboratories Administration
June 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 5, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Laboratories Administration
of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning January 8,
2020 and ending October 31, 2023. The Administration provides laboratory
testing to assist physicians and health officials in the prevention, diagnosis, and
control of human diseases.
Our audit disclosed that the Administration did not establish adequate controls
over cash receipts and accounts receivable. Check collections totaled
approximately $8.4 million during fiscal year 2023. In addition, the
Administration did not take timely collection action for delinquent accounts,
which totaled approximately $463,400 as of November 2023.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the finding contained
in our preceding audit report. We determined that the Administration
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Administration, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Administration. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and the Administration’s
willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective
actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Laboratories Administration, a unit of the Maryland Department of Health
(MDH), is responsible for providing laboratory testing to assist physicians and
health officials in the prevention, diagnosis, and control of human diseases. To
ensure the quality of laboratory services, the Administration develops standards
and regulations for medical laboratories, tissue banks, and physician office
laboratories. It also provides laboratory data for environmental safety and
enforcement of environmental protection laws. According to the State’s records,
the Administration’s central laboratory in Baltimore City and its two regional
laboratories conducted approximately 9.3 million laboratory tests during fiscal
year 2023, and the Administration’s expenditures totaled approximately $52
million during fiscal year 2023 (See Figure 1).
Figure 1
Laboratories Administration
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 174 86.1%
Vacant 28 13.9%
Total 202
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $19,456,870 37.4%
Technical and Special Fees 541,557 1.0%
Operating Expenses 32,107,128 61.6%
Total $52,105,555
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $37,781.203 72.5%
Special Fund 8,274,826 15.9%
Federal Fund 5,708,392 11.0%
Reimbursable Fund 341,134 0.6%
Total $52,105,555
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Ransomware Security Incident
In December 2021, MDH experienced a broad security incident resulting from a
ransomware attack1. This incident affected the entire MDH computer network
and disrupted information technology operations for all MDH servers and end
user computers, resulting in substantial impact on all MDH business operations
including the Administration. MDH notified the Department of Information
Technology’s (DoIT) Office of Security Management, which initiated incident
response measures. Various other parties were informed of this incident or
engaged for recovery efforts. DoIT concluded that no evidence existed indicating
that sensitive or regulated information had been improperly acquired.
The incident, response measures, and related controls were subject to review as
part of our recent audit of the MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units. This
incident did not significantly impact our audit, and we were able to obtain
information needed to satisfy our audit objectives and related conclusions.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated April 10, 2020. We determined that the
Administration satisfactorily addressed the finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Collections and Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
The Laboratories Administration did not establish adequate controls over
cash receipts and accounts receivable.
Analysis
The Administration did not establish adequate controls over cash receipts and
accounts receivable. Specifically, collections were not verified to subsequent
deposit. In addition, certain collection and accounts receivable functions were not
separated as required. The Administration received checks in the mail and in
1 As defined by the federal Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
4

--- Page 7 ---
person, primarily for the payment of lab fees. According to Administration
records, during fiscal year 2023, checks collected totaled approximately $8.4
million. The collections were processed using a remote deposit system, a process
that scans the images of checks and electronically transmits those images to the
bank for deposit.
Our review disclosed a documented independent deposit verification was not
performed. The Administration advised us that while a review was performed,
this review was completed prior to deposit and the employee responsible for
performing this review was not independent of the cash receipts process.
Specifically, this employee had access to the collections and also had the ability to
modify the initial recordation spreadsheet. In addition, this employee was
responsible for manually reviewing and approving the accounts receivable
transactions related to the collections and reconciling the collections to the
accounts receivable records. As a result, errors or other discrepancies could occur
without timely detections and there was a lack of independent assurance that all
collections had been deposited and that accounts receivable records were
accurate.
Our test of 12 daily collections, totaling approximately $4.7 million, during the
period December 2021 through June 2023 confirmed our understanding that there
was no documentation of the Administration performing independent verifications
to ensure the collections were subsequently deposited. Our test also disclosed that
all of the collections tested were deposited intact and had proper amounts credited
to reduce related account balances.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
collections be verified to deposit by an employee independent of the cash receipts
functions and that cash handling and accounts receivable functions be segregated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Administration
a. ensure that documented deposit verifications are performed by an
employee who does not have access to collections, and
b. separate cash receipts and accounts receivable functions.
We advised the Administration on accomplishing the necessary separation of
duties using existing personnel.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 2
The Administration did not refer certain delinquent accounts receivables to
the State’s Central Collections Unit (CCU) as required.
Analysis
The Administration did not refer certain delinquent accounts receivable to CCU in
a timely manner as required. The Administration provides laboratory testing
services to local hospitals and individuals for various purposes, and then bills
these entities for the testing that was provided. According to Administration
records, as of November 16, 2023, outstanding accounts receivable totaled
approximately $2.5 million of which $463,400 were more than 90 days past due,
and therefore should have been referred to CCU.
We reviewed 15 outstanding accounts of either significant dollar amounts or
significant age totaling approximately $249,600 from the accounts which were
delinquent for more than 90 days, and found that for 9 accounts totaling $177,800,
the accounts were forwarded to CCU between 52 and 184 days beyond 90 days
after the related invoice date. The remaining 6 accounts totaling $71,800 had not
been referred to CCU as of November 30, 2023, for periods ranging from 64 to
396 days beyond the required date. We were advised by Administration
personnel that accounts were not referred timely due to a lack of sufficient
personnel because of employee turnover.
State regulations require accounts deemed uncollectible by an agency to be
referred to CCU 90 days after the invoice date for additional collection efforts,
such as tax refund intercepts.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Administration refer delinquent accounts to CCU in
accordance with State regulations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Laboratories Administration
of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning January 8,
2020 and ending October 31, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
6

--- Page 9 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the
Administration’s financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to
evaluate its compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, accounts receivable, certain payroll
activities, certain procurement activities, and corporate purchasing card activity.
We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit
report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Administration
by MDH. These support services (such as certain other payroll and procurement
activities, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of MDH – Office of the Secretary and
Other Units. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal
controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of the Administration’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including the Administration.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 8, 2020 to October 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Administration’s operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
7

--- Page 10 ---
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from the Administration’s laboratory information
management system for the purpose of testing the propriety of billings, cash
receipts, and accounts receivable. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Administration’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Administration,
were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
8

--- Page 11 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Administration’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. The findings are also considered significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Administration that did not warrant inclusion
in this report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of the Administration, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of April 2024 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review Commission
1 Health Regulatory Commissions 01/25/24
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
Managed Care Program, known as HealthChoice
Medical Care Programs Administration
2 including oversight of the nine private Managed 12/14/23
– Managed Care Program
Care Organizations
3 Medical Care Programs Administration Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/23
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director for
Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
4 Office of the Secretary and Other Units Disabilities 10/19/23
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing
and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
5 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
Developmental Disabilities
6 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Administration
Behavioral Health Administration and  Behavioral Health Administration
Medical Care Programs Administration  Medical Care Programs Administration
7 10/25/22
- Administrative Service Organization Administrative Service Organization for
for Behavioral Health Services Behavioral Health Services
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
8 10/24/22
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institute for Children and Children and Adolescents
9 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
10 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
10

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of April 2024 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
 Office of Population Health Improvement
Prevention and Health Promotion
 Office of Preparedness and Response
Administration Office of Population
 Office of Provider Engagement and
11 Health Improvement Office of 02/23/21
Regulation – Office of Controlled
Preparedness and Response, and Office
Substances Administration
of Provider Engagement and Regulation
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulation – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
 22 Health Professional Boards and
12 Regulatory Services Commissions 01/19/21
 The Office of Health Care Quality
13 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
14 Pharmacy Services  Kidney Disease Program 08/31/20
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and
Treatment Program
15 Spring Grove Hospital Center Spring Grove Hospital Center 04/22/20
16 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center 03/17/20
17 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center 03/26/19
18 Springfield Hospital Center Springfield Hospital Center 12/06/18
19 Eastern Shore Hospital Center Eastern Shore Hospital Center 11/19/18
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
June 4,2024
Mr.Gregory A. Hook, CPA
LegislativeAuditor
Officeof LegislativeAudits
TheWarehouseatCamdenYards
351WestCamdenStreet,Suite400
Baltimore,MD 21201
DearMr.Hook:
Enclosed,pleasefindtheresponses tothedraftauditreportontheMarylandDepartmentof
Health–LaboratoriesAdministrationfor theperiodbeginningJanuary8,2020,andending
October31, 2023.
If you haveanyquestions,pleasecontactFrederickD. Doggettat410-767-0885 or emailat
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
LauraHerreraScott,M.D., Secretary
MarylandDepartmentof Health
cc: ErinK. McMullen,R.N., Chiefof Staff, MDH
MarieGrant,AssistantSecretaryfor HealthPolicy,
NileshKalyanaraman,M.D., DeputySecretary,PublicHealthServices,MDH
ErinS. Penniston,Chiefof Staff, PublicHealthServices,MDH
RobertA. Myers, Ph.D., Director,LaboratoriesAdministration
FrederickD. Doggett,Director,InternalControls,AuditCompliance&Information
Security, MDH
DeneenToney,DeputyDirector,Audit&Compliance,MDH
CarleanRhames-Jowers, AuditSupervisor,InternalControls,AuditCompliance&
InformationSecurity,MDH

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Laboratories Administration
Agency Response Form
Collections and Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
The Laboratories Administration did not establish adequate controls over
cash receipts and accounts receivable.
We recommend that the Administration
a. ensure that documented deposit verifications are performed by an
employee who does not have access to collections, and
b. separate cash receipts and accounts receivable functions.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/24
Please provide details of The Laboratories Administration is developing a standard operating
corrective action or procedure (SOP) that will detail the processes for cash receipts and
explain disagreement. accounts receivable. The SOP will include controls to ensure that deposit
verifications are performed by an employee who does not have access to
collections or related records. The Administration will hire or assign
additional staff to ensure successful implementation of the SOP. To
ensure immediate compliance, the Chief Fiscal Officer and Deputy
Director (backup) have begun verifying deposits so the A/R staff
complies with the guidelines.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/24
Please provide details of The Labs Administration is developing a standard operating procedure
corrective action or (SOP) that will detail the processes for cash receipts and accounts
explain disagreement. receivable. The SOP will include controls to ensure the separation of
duties between processing cash receipts and maintaining accounts
receivable records. The Administration will hire or assign additional
staff to ensure successful implementation of the SOP. To ensure
immediate compliance, the Chief Fiscal Officer and Deputy Director
(backup) will verify deposits so the A/R staff complies with the
guidelines.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Laboratories Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
The Administration did not refer certain delinquent accounts receivables to
the State’s Central Collections Unit (CCU) as required.
We recommend that the Administration refer delinquent accounts to CCU in
accordance with State regulations.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/24
Please provide details of The Laboratories Administration is developing a standard operating
corrective action or procedure (SOP) that details requirements for referring delinquent
explain disagreement. accounts to the CCU in order to ensure that these accounts are referred
90 days after the initial invoice date. We currently have a permanent
staff to handle this process.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Zoe D. Smith
Staff Auditor