Title: Office of the State Prosecutor
Date: 06/25/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=667d6a66240615c379b3d4d2
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:07:38.421596
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the State Prosecutor
June 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 25, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the State Prosecutor
(OSP) for the period beginning May 16, 2019 and ending June 30, 2023. OSP is
an independent agency within the Executive Branch responsible for investigating
and, where warranted, prosecuting criminal offenses under the State election laws,
Public Ethics Law, and bribery laws, and certain multi-jurisdictional crimes and
criminal offenses committed by a State or local official.
Our audit disclosed that OSP did not comply with certain State Procurement
regulations for a major system procurement. Specifically, OSP purchased a third-
party case management system and related system maintenance services without a
competitive procurement process, written contract, or publication of the
solicitation and award on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage, and without control
agency approval. Payments to this vendor totaled approximately $131,000
between June 2020 and July 2023.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.

--- Page 4 ---
OSP’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed OSP’s response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of the response which will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Additionally, in
accordance with our policy, we have edited OSP’s response to remove references
to certain state agencies. Finally, consistent with State law, we have redacted the
elements of OSP’s response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by OSP and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement
appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Information Systems Security
Finding 1 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 5
Procurement
Finding 2 – OSP did not comply with certain aspects of State procurement 5
regulations when it purchased a third-party case management system
and related maintenance services.
Information Systems Security
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 6
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the State Prosecutor (OSP) is an independent agency within the
Executive Branch. OSP investigates and, where warranted, prosecutes criminal
offenses under the State election laws and Public Ethics Law, the bribery laws,
and offenses constituting criminal malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in
office (when committed by a State or local official), as well as multi-jurisdictional
crimes. OSP conducts these investigations on its own initiative or at the request
of the Governor, the Attorney General, the General Assembly, the State Ethics
Commission, or a State’s Attorney.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2023, OSP’s expenditures
totaled approximately $2.3 million, of which approximately $1.9 million was for
salaries, wages, and fringe benefits as noted in Figure 1.
Figure 1
OSP Positions, Expenditures and Funding Source
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 13 100.0%
Vacant 0 0.0%
Total 13
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $1,777,613 76.5%
Technical and Special Fees 136,555 5.9%
Operating Expenses 409,293 17.6%
Total $2,323,461
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Source
Funding Percent
General Funds $2,323,461 100.0%
Total $2,323,461
So urce: State financial and personnel records
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security
We determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with OSP’s response, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Procurement
Finding 2
OSP did not comply with certain aspects of State procurement regulations
when it purchased a third-party case management system and related
maintenance services.
Analysis
OSP did not comply with certain aspects of State procurement regulations when it
purchased a third-party electronic case management system and related
maintenance services as a sole source procurement. During the period from June
2020 to July 2023 OSP paid the vendor $131,000 for a case management system
and related maintenance services.
OSP obtained the services of a vendor to provide a case management system
without a competitive procurement process and without preparing the required
written sole source procurement justification prior to the procurement. OSP
management advised that it selected the vendor based on interviews conducted
with other State and local entities and its determination that using other vendors
would not be cost effective. However, OSP could not provide documentation to
support that other vendors were not cost effective, and an informal agency
determination of cost-effectiveness does not justify the use of a sole source
procurement. Further, OSP management provided correspondence from the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) management which indicated that
a competitive procurement may be needed. Finally, we noted that OSP did not
5

--- Page 8 ---
have a signed contract with the vendor, did not publish the solicitation and award
on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA), and did not obtain control
agency approval, as required by State procurement regulations.
State procurement regulations stipulate that the sole source procurement method
can only be used when no other source for the item is acceptable or suitable, and
its use must be supported with a written justification approved by the agency
head. Furthermore, procurement regulations require formal written contracts with
certain critical provisions and sole source contract awards are required to be
published on eMMA within 30 days. Regulations further provide that sole sourced
contracts valued at $100,000 or greater require approval by the Department of
General Services – Office of State Procurement and the Board of Public Works.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OSP comply with State procurement regulations by
adequately documenting the justification for this sole source award, execute
a written contract, publish the contract award on eMMA, and retroactively
obtain control agency approval, as applicable.
Information Systems Security
We determined that Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with OSP’s response, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the State Prosecutor
(OSP) for the period beginning May 16, 2019 and ending June 30, 2023. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OSP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, and payroll.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 16, 2019 to June 30, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the OSP’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in the
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data) and the
State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor
7

--- Page 10 ---
administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card
activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
OSP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OSP, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the OSP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OSP that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
8

--- Page 11 ---
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to OSP and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
OSP’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise OSP regarding the results of our review of its
response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX
STATE OF MARYLAND
CHARLTON T. HOWARD Ill
State Prosecutor Hampton Plaza
Suite 410
SARAH R. DAVID
300 East Joppa Road
Deputy State Prosecutor
Towson, MD 21286-3152
LETAM DUSON Telephone (4 10) 3 21-4067
ABIGAIL E. TICSE
1 (800) 695-4058
MARY W. SETZER
Fax (410) 321-3851
Senior Assistant State Prosecutors OFFICE OF
THE STATE PROSECUTOR
June 3, 2024
Gregory J. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21202
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed is our response to the Office of Legislative Audits draft audit report on the
Office of the State Prosecutor for the period beginning May 16, 2019, and ending June 30, 2023.
We very much appreciate the time and effort of your team in conducting the audit. As reflected
in our response, and as stated in prior discussions with your team, we concur with two of the
reports' findings, and disagree with certain aspects of the other finding. Details are provided in
our response. We are available to discuss this matter further if desired, as we respect the role of
your office and would like to reach a consensus on these issues.
Please do not hesitate to contact our office with any questions about our response or the
audit in general.
Sincerely,

--- Page 13 ---
Office of the State Prosecutor
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 1 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including
the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with OSP’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, OSP’s responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 14 ---
Office of the State Prosecutor
Agency Response Form
Procurement
Finding 2
OSP did not comply with certain aspects of State procurement regulations
when it purchased a third-party case management system and related
maintenance services.
We recommend that OSP comply with State procurement regulations by
adequately documenting the justification for this sole source award, execute
a written contract, publish the contract award on eMMA, and retroactively
obtain control agency approval, as applicable.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Although a small agency without a dedicated procurement
additional comments as team, OSP consulted extensively with other state agencies, in
deemed necessary.
particular the Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
and one other state agency, as well our legal counsel and the
Maryland Procurement Manual and other relevant regulations,
prior to proceeding with a sole source small procurement of
the chosen electronic case management system, and to the best
of our ability duplicated the previous process followed by
another state agency in acquiring the same system. OSP fully
documented in the paperwork accompanying the application
for grant funds utilized in this project, and in multiple emails
and other written documents, the rationale underlying the
procurement, and subsequently conducted an extensive review
to identify a case management system which would best meet
OSP’s unique requirements. We believed that absent
contravening regulations, and given the guidance provided by
the Maryland Procurement Manual, as well as other state
agencies, the procurement cost (under $50,000) and unique
qualifications of the chosen system, as well as other relevant
circumstances, justified the use of a Sole Source Small
Procurement, within the authority of OSP to execute, for a
year’s software license.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 15 ---
Office of the State Prosecutor
Agency Response Form
OSP nonetheless acknowledges the concerns raised by OLA.
Given the success of the system after the initial year trial, and
our subsequent year sole source small procurement purchases
(under $30000 per year), it makes sense to obtain additional
documentation and seek a longer-term procurement to
enhance the transparency of the procurement, ensure seamless
agency operations, and remove any question of regulatory
compliance. Accordingly, we will adopt their
recommendations to engage in a new contract process.
Upon being notified by OLA that a separate, standalone
memorandum justifying the sole source selection was
required, the OSP agency head authored a memorandum
documenting the purchase justification and provided a copy to
the OLA Audit Team.
As to why a sole source procurement was necessary, OSP has
unique agency electronic data management requirements, as it
is the only agency of its kind in the state, and indeed in the
US, where all investigation and prosecution functions
regarding crimes within the agency’s jurisdiction, as well as
civil litigation regarding those matters, are embodied in one
stand-alone organization. Thus, a case management
application had to support investigative factors such as law
enforcement reporting, the ability to handle evidence review
and documentation in complex financial matters, search
warrant support, confidential informant management, criminal
intelligence collection, and forensic support; litigation factors
such as discovery, motion practice, appellate and post-
conviction practice, attorney work product protection filter
team and restricted data compartmentalization, and on site
trial support; as well as administrative factors regarding
agency metrics and mandatory reporting. Accordingly, OSP
needed a system which supported all those functions. After
raising the topic, as noted in the OLA Report, our assigned
DoIT Project Officer subsequently concurred with our
determination.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 16 ---
Office of the State Prosecutor
Agency Response Form
OSP then conducted an extensive review of available systems
utilized by other state and local agencies, as well as others
commercially available.
OSP initially reviewed a number of case management systems
utilized by other prosecution, investigation and inspector
general agencies, as well as surveying other available systems
In addition, the State Prosecutor, a retired federal law
enforcement senior executive, had extensive experience with
managing electronic case management systems, including
service for several years as the head of the national Law
Enforcement Information Exchange (LINX) network, and was
very familiar with industry standards and practices. As
expected, most systems reviewed by OSP were tailored and
marketed to support either the investigative mission or the
litigation process, but not both. Based upon OSP’s analysis,
the system chosen, already utilized, and validated, by several
local agencies, including the other state agency previously
referenced, was the sole case management application we
found which was proven reliable and could be tailored to meet
all agency investigation, litigation, and administrative
requirements.
As to the procurement process, as noted, OSP is a small
agency, consisting at the time of 13 personnel, none of whom
were procurement specialists, and so we relied heavily on
utilizing the technical and procurement expertise of both the
State Department of Information Technology (DOIT) and
another state agency, as well as our own assigned Assistant
Attorney General. OSP also followed the guidance contained
in the Maryland Procurement Manual. As noted, the other
state agency, in coordination with DOIT, had previously
procured and was currently using the identical system OSP
ultimately selected. OSP followed our partners’ guidance
and/or duplicated their efforts when acquiring the product. In
addition, the process was conducted during the COVID
epidemic, which posed several logistics and coordination
challenges.
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 17 ---
Office of the State Prosecutor
Agency Response Form
After determining the chosen system was the only system
meeting OSP requirements, DOIT conducted a full
examination and validation of the information security
provisions required by DOIT for State IT contracts and
advised that the system satisfied all requirements.
The vendor provided cost information, which tracked the
current costs incurred by another state agency and other local
agencies utilizing the system, and was more cost effective
than other, less qualified candidates, as well as full licensing
agreements for the system, which detailed all contractual
obligations. We undertook a final review of all documents
with our partners and in consultation with the Maryland
Procurement Manual and other regulations. As the purchase
costs of this small procurement were under $50,000, OSP was
advised that no additional administrative steps were necessary,
and we undertook the purchase utilizing the same purchase
order/licensing agreement method as the other state agency
adopted.
In a related but separate matter, although the original intent
was to utilize DOIT for cloud management services for the
system, DOIT later recommended that the most efficient and
cost-effective option was to purchase cloud hosting services
directly from the chosen vendor, which we did. As with the
original purchase, DOIT also reviewed the cloud management
services licensing agreement and validated that all information
security requirements were satisfied. (Note: As additional
validation, DOIT had previously done a full review of the
system and approved another state agency’s purchase of
system services prior to our acquisition.) In our view the
relatively small amount for the second purchase ($13,000) and
the unique advantages offered by the vendor also met the
criteria for a sole source small procurement, and thus did not
trigger additional administrative requirements.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 18 ---
Office of the State Prosecutor
Agency Response Form
After validating the utility and worth of the application,
subsequent year purchases of both the application license and
separate cloud services were also under the small procurement
threshold and were processed accordingly. As per our review
of the Maryland Procurement Manual, notice in eMMA was
not required at the time for this type of sole source purchase.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of Given OLA concerns, OSP will adopt OLA’s recommendation. We
corrective action or have already provided written justification for the sole source award and
explain disagreement. other documentation to OLA, and we will seek a revised contract and
other required steps for the agency sole source purchase of the chosen
electronic case management system, in consultation with our Counsel,
and in compliance with State procurement regulations.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 19 ---
Office of the State Prosecutor
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security
OLA has determined that Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available
audit report in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the
specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along
with OSP’s responses, have been redacted from this report copy, OSP’s responses
indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 20 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Senior Auditor