Title: Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services
Date: 06/28/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66841b015f05f8ce30f5bce2
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:08:07.333281
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and
Victim Services
June 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 28, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Governor’s Office of Crime
Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services (GOCPYVS) for the period beginning
November 19, 2018 and ending January 31, 2023. GOCPYVS is responsible for
allocating resources and developing public policy related to criminal justice,
crime reduction, juvenile delinquency, and victim services.
Our audit disclosed that GOCPYVS did not obtain documentation to support
expenditures and performance data reported by grantees and did not have a
comprehensive plan to audit grantees to ensure grant funds were used as intended.
Although 3,498 grants were awarded during our audit period, only 14 audits were
completed, of which 7 identified unallowable expenditures.
In addition, GOCPYVS did not reconcile its grant records for State funded grants
to the related State accounting records. Our analysis of grant disbursements in
fiscal year 2022, disclosed that grant disbursements recorded on the State’s
accounting records exceeded the disbursements on GOCPYVS’ grant records by
$23.2 million. In addition, since GOCPYVS did not reconcile its grant records,
this may have contributed to GOCPYVS paying a grantee $157,600 more than the
grant award.
Furthermore, GOCPYVS did not always submit timely requests for
reimbursement of federal fund grant expenditures. Our test of 10 grant awards
during the period February 2020 through October 2022 identified 4
reimbursement requests that were delayed between 95 and 157 days after the
related expenditures occurred. As a result, based on our calculations, the State
lost interest income totaling approximately $13,000.

--- Page 4 ---
GOCPYVS also improperly reverted general funds at the end of fiscal years 2020
and 2022 which resulted in its need for a deficiency appropriation to cover
expenditures as they came due in the following fiscal year.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of one finding and part
of a second finding contained in our Executive Department – Office of the
Governor audit report dated November 12, 2019. We determined that GOCPYVS
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
GOCPYVS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
GOCPYVS. We also wish to acknowledge GOCPYVS’ willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
External Fiscal Audit 5
Organizational Change and Renaming Subsequent to Audit Field Work 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Grants
Finding 1 – The Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and 8
Victim Services (GOCPYVS) did not obtain documentation to
support expenditures and performance data reported by grantees and
did not have a comprehensive plan to audit grantees to ensure grant
funds were used as intended.
Finding 2 – GOCPYVS did not reconcile its grant records for State 10
funded grants to the related State accounting records resulting in
discrepancies going undetected.
Federal Funds
Finding 3 – GOCPYVS did not always submit timely requests for 11
reimbursement of federal fund grant expenditures resulting in lost
interest income totaling at least $13,000.
Year-End Closeout
Finding 4 – GOCPYVS improperly reverted general funds at the end of 12
fiscal years 2020 and 2022, resulting in the need for subsequent
deficiency appropriations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services
(GOCPYVS) was created effective March 7, 2020 by Chapter 11, Laws of
Maryland, 2020. The legislation created GOCPYVS from the former Governor’s
Office of Crime Control and Prevention (GOCCP). In addition, the legislation
renamed the former Governor’s Office for Children (GOC) to be the Division of
Children and Youth under GOCPYVS and transferred all duties and
responsibilities of the former GOCCP and GOC to the newly established unit.1
GOCPYVS is a coordinating office that allocates resources and develops public
policy related to criminal justice, crime reduction, juvenile delinquency, and
victim services. It plans, promotes, and funds efforts with governmental entities,
private organizations, and the community to advance public policy, enhance
public safety, reduce crime and juvenile delinquency, and serve victims.
The activities related to the former GOCCP and GOC through November 18,
2018, were included in OLA’s audit of the Executive Department – Office of the
Governor; Boards, Commissions, and Offices; Governor’s Office for Children;
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing dated November 12, 2019. Due to
enhanced responsibilities and the significance of funding, we have determined
that a separate audit of GOCPYVS is now warranted. Consequently, our current
audit of GOCPYVS includes activities subsequent to November 18, 2018.
According to the State’s records, GOCPYVS’ expenditures totaled approximately
$367.7 million (primarily operating expenditures) during fiscal year 2023 (see
Figure 1 on the following page). As of June 30, 2023, approximately 19.7 percent
of GOCPYVS’ positions were vacant. The vacancies included certain positions
which may have contributed, at least in part, to some of the issues identified in
this report.
1 As noted on page 7, a Governor’s Executive Order effective January 18, 2024 reorganized and
renamed GOCPYVS.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
GOCPYVS Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 53 80.3%
Vacant 13 19.7%
Total 66
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 6,740,301 1.8%
Technical and Special Fees 1,262,463 0.4%
Operating Expenses 359,689,665 97.8%
Total $367,692,429
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $283,352,204 77.1%
Special Fund 12,640,222 3.4%
Federal Fund 69,872,949 19.0%
Reimbursable Fund 1,827,054 0.5%
Total $367,692,429
Source: State financial and personnel records
External Fiscal Audit
The 2021 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) required GOCPYVS to contract with an
accounting firm for a fiscal audit of the GOCPYVS grants management processes
and all grants budgeted in the 2020 and 2021 legislative appropriations and to
issue an audit report by December 31, 2021. The JCR request was a response to a
significant number of erroneous grant reversions in fiscal 2020, resulting in $17.2
million in general fund revisions. GOCPYVS did not obtain and submit the audit
report because of staffing issues. Accordingly, the 2023 JCR included the same
request, with the addition of grants budgeted in 2022 to the scope of the audit.
The private accounting firm’s audit commenced in January 2023 and a final
report, dated May 12, 2023, was submitted to the General Assembly in June 2023.
The audit report did not include findings but included six recommendations (see
Figure 2). Five recommendations (1, 2, 3, 5, and 6) related to GOCPYVS’ Grants
5

--- Page 8 ---
Management System (GMS) and one recommendation (4) related to personnel
productivity.
Figure 2
External Audit of GOCPYVS Grants Management Process
Recommendation/GOCPYVS Response
GOCPYVS management should include in GMS (Grants Management
System) the underlying support provided by the subrecipient grantee for
1 expenditures made and track such items by fiscal year. Agree. This has not
been a practice in the past due to the imposition it will place on recipients, but
the agency will implement this recommendation.
GOCPYVS should track all grant activity centrally in GMS. Not all grants
allocated by the agency are competitive awards and do not require the needs
2
of the GMS system. Many of the generally funded grants are passthrough or
formulaic and a one-time issuance.
GOCPYVS should store in GMS all future Federal Financial Reports (FFR)
and supporting Financial Management Information Systems (FMIS)
3 expenditure activity reports. Additionally, management should consider
uploading available information for historical activity (i.e., old FFR and
expenditure support). Agree.
It was observed that fiscal grants specialists on average for 2022 processed
approximately $54 million of expenditures while the six grants’ specialists
processed approximately $37 million of grant awards. GOCPYVS should
4 perform a time study of individual processes to determine the appropriate level
of volume of activity each person is responsible for. Through this time study,
GOCPYVS’ management can determine the optimum levels of output and
design accountability around such amounts. Agree.
GOCPYVS should track all grants awarded through GMS and include full
documentation of activity. As GOCPYVS continues to develop the Standard
Operating Procedures, it should consider the capabilities within GMS to
5
determine if it can be utilized better to support and manage the grant activity.
Agree. The agency uses GMS to the extent practical and will work with a
vendor to upgrade the system so that it can be utilized to track all grants.
GOCPYVS should perform monthly reconciliations between FMIS and GMS
to document that the grant activity recorded in GMS is properly reflected in
FMIS. GOCPYVS should perform budget to actual comparisons to prevent
6
activity that is over budget. It is recommended that GOCPYVS perform a time
study of individual processes to determine the appropriate level of volume of
activity each person is responsible for. Agree.
Source: https://dlslibrary.state.md.us/publications/JCR/2023/2023_19-20_2023.pdf
6

--- Page 9 ---
The fieldwork for our audit concluded concurrently with the issuance of the
private accounting firm’s fiscal audit report. Our audit report includes one
recommendation (recommendation 2a) that is similar to recommendation 6 noted
above from the independent audit.
Organizational Change and Renaming Subsequent to Audit Field
Work
On January 18, 2024, the Governor signed an Executive Order which
reestablished the Governor’s Office for Children as a separate unit within the
Executive Department, rather than being part of GOCPYVS. The Order also
renamed GOCPYVS to be the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of one finding and part of a
second finding contained in our Executive Department – Office of the Governor
audit report dated November 12, 2019. We determined that GOCPYVS
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Grants
Background
According to the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim
Services (GOCPYVS) records, from November 19, 2018 through January 31,
2023 GOCPYVS awarded 3,498 grants totaling approximately $912.7 million, of
which $770.2 million was awarded in accordance with statute or budgetary
appropriation and $142.5 million was competitively awarded by GOCPYVS.
Further, of these awards 1,976 related to State funded grants totaling
approximately $653.5 million, of which $559.3 million was awarded in
accordance with statute or budgetary appropriation and $94.2 million was
competitively awarded.
GOCPYVS paid grantees based on quarterly reports prepared by grantees that
included grant expenditures and performance data. Grant disbursements were
processed through the State’s Financial Management Information System and
related grant activity was maintained in GOCPYVS’ Grants Management System.
Finding 1
GOCPYVS did not obtain documentation to support expenditures and
performance data reported by grantees and did not have a comprehensive
plan to audit grantees to ensure grant funds were used as intended.
Analysis
GOCPYVS did not obtain documentation to support expenditures and
performance data reported by grantees and did not have a comprehensive plan to
audit grantees to ensure grant funds were used as intended. Specifically,
GOCPYVS paid grantees based on quarterly reports of grant expenditures and
performance data submitted by grantees without requiring grantees to submit
supporting documentation to ensure the grant funds were being used as intended.
GOCPYVS management advised us that, rather than requiring the submission of
supporting documentation with quarterly reports, it reviewed the grantee’s support
for the reported grant expenditures during triennial audits. However, our review
disclosed that GOCPYVS only did a limited number of audits, did not have a
comprehensive plan to audit the grantees, and did not ensure its audit conclusions
were supported.
For grants awarded between November 19, 2018 and November 1, 2020,
GOCPYVS only conducted 14 audits of the 1,802 grants awarded which
represented approximately $6.5 million of the $406.2 million awarded (2 percent).
8

--- Page 11 ---
Furthermore, GOCPYVS did not conduct any audits of the 2,804 grants awarded
between November 1, 2020, through December 31, 2023, with grant awards
totaling $816.5 million. In our opinion, GOCPYVS lacks the necessary resources
to conduct audits of all grantees but did not have a comprehensive plan to
prioritize which grantees should be selected for audits (such as based on the
significance of the grants or risk associated with the grantee). In addition, for the
audits that were performed, GOCPYVS did not verify that the reported
performance data related to the use of the grant funds.
GOCPYVS also did not always maintain support for the conclusions reached in
its audits. Specifically, GOCPYVS did not retain supporting documentation for
audits with no reportable findings, and our review of four audits with reportable
findings disclosed that two did not have adequate support for the conclusions
reached. For example, one audit report noted that a grantee did not comply with
the grant terms to provide $18,000 in matching funds. However, GOCPYVS did
not retain documentation supporting this conclusion.
The lack of sufficient audit effort is significant because 7 of the 14 audits
GOCPYVS conducted (which covered just $6.5 million of the $1.22 billion in
grant awards noted above) identified unallowable expenditures totaling $126,000.
Consequently, there is a lack of assurance that all grant funds were expended in
accordance with the related grant agreements and that all grantees were achieving
the grant programs’ intended objectives, as specified in the grant awards.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that GOCPYVS develop a comprehensive process to ensure
grant payments are supported by reliable grantee expenditures and
performance data. Specifically, GOCPYVS should
a. establish a policy to require grantee reporting of supporting
documentation to enable it to verify grantee data, on a test basis;
b. create a formal grantee audit policy that provides for the selection of
grantees for audit based on objective criteria and ensures all audits are
performed in a comprehensive manner, retaining appropriate
documentation to support conclusions; and
c. take appropriate action to recover any grant payments that are
determined to be unsupported.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
GOCPYVS did not reconcile its grant records for State funded grants to the
related State accounting records resulting in discrepancies going undetected.
Analysis
GOCPYVS did not reconcile its grant records for State funded grants to the
related State accounting records. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that
GOCPYVS’ grant records were complete and accurate. In this regard, our
analysis of disbursements related to 4212 of 441 State funded grants awarded in
fiscal year 2022 disclosed that grant disbursements recorded on the State’s
accounting records ($117.8 million) exceeded the disbursements recorded on
GOOCPYVS’ grant records ($94.6 million) by $23.2 million. GOCPYVS was
not aware of and could not readily explain the discrepancy.
The failure to conduct periodic reconciliations and the lack of reliable grant
records could have contributed, at least in part, to GOCPYVS disbursing funds to
grantees in excess of their related grant awards. Specifically, our review of 112
police protection grant awards totaling $74.6 million disclosed overpayments
totaling approximately $718,000 related to 34 grant awards. In one instance,
GOCPYVS paid the grantee $157,600 more than the related grant award.
GOCPYVS was not aware of, and could not readily justify, the apparent excess
payments to this grantee.
The Comptroller of Maryland's Accounting Procedures Manual requires a
monthly reconciliation of separate agency-based systems to the State’s accounting
records. The grant agreement establishes the awarded amount which is the
maximum amount the grantee can receive from that grant award.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that GOCPYVS
a. establish and implement procedures to reconcile its grant records for
State funded grants to the State’s accounting system and investigate any
differences including the $23.2 million noted above, and
b. review the aforementioned payments that exceeded the grant awards and
take appropriate corrective action.
2 Our analysis excluded 20 grants with disbursements totaling approximately $3.3 million which
were made via interagency transfer. We focused our analysis on grants which were disbursed via
physical checks or wire transfer, which accounted for the majority of disbursements.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 3
GOCPYVS did not always submit timely requests for reimbursement of
federal fund grant expenditures resulting in lost interest income totaling at
least $13,000.
Analysis
GOCPYVS did not always submit requests for reimbursement of federal fund
grant expenditures in a timely manner. Consequently, the State lost interest
income that would have been earned had the funds been requested and received
timely. These expenditures primarily related to local law enforcement grants to
cover the cost of various programs for victims of crime. According to the State’s
records, during fiscal years 2020 through 2023, federal fund grant expenditures
totaled $254.3 million, the majority of which related to the Crime Victim
Assistance Act.
Our test of federal fund reimbursement requests for 10 grant awards3 totaling
$22.3 million during the period February 2020 through October 2022 disclosed
that 4 reimbursement requests, totaling $6.5 million, were submitted between 95
and 157 days after the related expenditures occurred. For example,
reimbursement for February 28, 2022 expenditures totaling $2.1 million related to
the Crime Victim Assistance Act grant were not requested until July 5, 2022 (126
days after the expenditure). Federal guidelines for these grant funds permit
reimbursements to be requested when expenditures are incurred. Based on our
calculations, which allowed for drawdowns 60 days after the end of the month in
which the expenditure occurred, the untimely recovery of these expenditures
resulted in lost interest income to the State totaling approximately $13,000.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that GOCPYVS timely submit requests for reimbursement
of federal fund grant expenditures.
3 We selected 10 significant drawdown journal entries totaling $26.3 million and then selected 1
grant expenditure from each (totaling $22.3 million) which occurred during the period February
2020 through October 2022.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Year-End Closeout
Finding 4
GOCPYVS improperly reverted general funds at the end of fiscal years 2020
and 2022, resulting in the need for subsequent deficiency appropriations.
Analysis
GOCPYVS improperly reverted general funds at the end of fiscal years 2020 and
2022, resulting in the need for subsequent deficiency appropriations. This
condition was caused, at least in part, because GOCPYVS did not record year-end
accrued expenditures for outstanding liabilities at the end of fiscal years 2020 and
2022, as required. As a result, the funds were not available to cover these
expenditures when they became due in the subsequent fiscal year. Although
sufficient unspent general funds remained at the end of fiscal years 2020 and 2022
to fund accrued expenditures, the failure to record those accruals, coupled with
the reversion of unspent appropriations, necessitated deficiency appropriations in
fiscal years 2021 and 2023 totaling $4.8 million and $16.9 million, respectively.
The Comptroller of Maryland General Accounting Division’s (GAD) annual
closing instructions require agencies to estimate the amount of expenditures
related to goods and services provided prior to July 1 for which the related invoice
has not been received and record them as an accrued expenditure.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that GOCPYVS
a. ensure the propriety of all amounts reverted at fiscal year-end; and
b. record all required fiscal year-end transactions, including accrued
expenditures, in accordance with the GAD instructions.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Governor’s Office of Crime
Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services (GOCPYVS) for the period beginning
November 19, 2018, and ending January 31, 2023. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine GOCPYVS’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included grants, federal funds, budgetary closeout,
procurements and disbursements, and payroll. We also determined the status of
one finding and part of a second finding contained in our Executive Department –
Office of the Governor audit report dated November 12, 2019.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of GOCPYVS’ compliance with those laws and regulations because
the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit
such programs administrated by State agencies, including GOCPYVS.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 19, 2018 to January 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of GOCPYVS’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
13

--- Page 16 ---
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from GOCPYVS’ grants management system and from the
Statewide Personnel System for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as grant
and payroll transactions. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
GOCPYVS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to GOCPYVS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
14

--- Page 17 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect GOCPYVS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to GOCPYVS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
GOCPYVS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise GOCPYVS regarding
the results of our review of its response.
15

--- Page 18 ---
APPENDIX
DOROTHYLENNIG
ExecutiveDirector
June 14,2024
Mr.Gregory A. Hook, CPA
LegislativeAuditor
Officeof LegislativeAudits
TheWarehouseatCamdenYards
351WestCamdenStreet,Suite400
Baltimore,MD 21201
DearMr.Hook,
Enclosedpleasefindresponses relatedtotheauditreportontheGovernor’s Officeof CrimePrevention,
Youth,andVictimServicesfor theperiodbeginningNovember19,2018andendingJanuary31,2023.
TheGovernor’s Officeof CrimePreventionandPolicy(GOCPP), formerlyknown as theGovernor’s
Officeof CrimePrevention,YouthandVictimServices,wouldliketothankyour auditteamfor their
professionalismandthoroughness duringtheaudit.
Sincerely,
Dorothy J. Lennig,Esq.
ExecutiveDirector
cc: SylviaSenkus, ChiefFinancialOfficer,GOCPP
Attachment
100CommunityPl.∙Crownsville,MD21032
Tel:410-697-9338∙Fax:410-558-6697∙TollFree:1-877-687-9004∙TTYUsers:CallviaMarylandRelay
http://goccp.maryland.gov/

--- Page 19 ---
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services
Agency Response Form
Grants
Finding 1
GOCPYVS did not obtain documentation to support expenditures and
performance data reported by grantees and did not have a comprehensive
plan to audit grantees to ensure grant funds were used as intended.
We recommend that GOCPYVS develop a comprehensive process to ensure
grant payments are supported by reliable grantee expenditures and
performance data. Specifically, GOCPYVS should
a. establish a policy to require grantee reporting of supporting
documentation to enable it to verify grantee data, on a test basis;
b. create a formal grantee audit policy that provides for the selection of
grantees for audit based on objective criteria and ensures all audits are
performed in a comprehensive manner, retaining appropriate
documentation to support conclusions; and
c. take appropriate action to recover any grant payments that are
determined to be unsupported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2024
Please provide details of GOCPP is currently in the process of updating the current subrecipient
corrective action or monitoring methodology and policies.
explain disagreement. The agency is working on an annual financial and programmatic risk
assessment of subrecipients (performing quarterly if deficiencies are
detected).
In addition to any required documentation, the agency will, on a test
basis, request subrecipients to provide supporting documentation to
verify expenditures and monitor compliance. Implementation of the
above-mentioned attributes will provide reasonable assurance with
regards to the adequacy of subrecipient billings and reduce the risk of
misstatements and misappropriations.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2024
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The agency is developing an updated grant audit policy to evaluate and
corrective action or monitor compliance based on objective criteria.
explain disagreement. Any documentation collected to perform the audit will be retained to
support findings.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The agency currently performs a review process and determines what if
corrective action or any amounts are disallowed and/or unsupported. Grantees are formerly
explain disagreement. notified, and a repayment plan is determined. Grantee(s) may submit a
check or have amount deducted from next reimbursement.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 21 ---
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
GOCPYVS did not reconcile its grant records for State funded grants to the
related State accounting records resulting in discrepancies going undetected.
We recommend that GOCPYVS
a. establish and implement procedures to reconcile its grant records for
State funded grants to the State’s accounting system and investigate any
differences including the $23.2 million noted above, and
b. review the aforementioned payments that exceeded the grant awards and
take appropriate corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of GOCPP has implemented monthly reconciling between the Grant
corrective action or Management System (GMS) and the Financial Management Information
explain disagreement. System (FMIS). Any differences are promptly addressed. The noted
variance of $23.2 million was primarily due to $18.6 million for the
fourth quarter distribution of a state program and various year-end
accruals recorded in FMIS but not in GMS. At the time, due to its unique
quarterly payments, the program was not monitored within GMS but has
since been added.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of After further review it was determined that the $157,600 was not an over
corrective action or payment of the grant award but rather the result of a Grant Adjustment
explain disagreement. Notice (GAN). The modified award amount had not been updated within
GMS. The agency has implemented processes to ensure adjustments are
reviewed and updated in a timely manner within the grant system.
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 22 ---
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 3
GOCPYVS did not always submit timely requests for reimbursement of
federal fund grant expenditures resulting in lost interest income totaling at
least $13,000.
We recommend that GOCPYVS timely submit requests for reimbursement
of federal fund grant expenditures.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of GOCPP has implemented monthly reconciliations and requests of
corrective action or drawdown amounts by the 15th of each month. Federal funds are
explain disagreement. received within 3-5 business days and promptly recorded within FMIS.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 23 ---
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services
Agency Response Form
Year-End Closeout
Finding 4
GOCPYVS improperly reverted general funds at the end of fiscal years 2020
and 2022, resulting in the need for subsequent deficiency appropriations.
We recommend that GOCPYVS
a. ensure the propriety of all amounts reverted at fiscal year-end; and
b. record all required fiscal year-end transactions, including accrued
expenditures, in accordance with the GAD instructions.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of The agency will ensure that any reverted amounts are accurate and
corrective action or proper.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of The budget and expenditures are monitored monthly. Prior to and
corrective action or during year-end close, collaborative, and coordinating efforts have been
explain disagreement. outlined and timelines set to ensure all amounts are accrued properly.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 24 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Jammie A. Brown
Staff Auditor