Title: Military Department
Date: 06/27/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66841b015f05f8ce30f5bce3
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:07:48.284031
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Military Department
June 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 27, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Military Department for the
period beginning May 21, 2019 and ending June 15, 2023. The Department
performs various functions for the public, including maintaining Maryland
National Guard locations.
Our audit disclosed that the Department divided purchases of certain goods and
services in multiple procurements circumventing control agency approvals and
cardholder single transactions limits. Consequently, the State’s purchasing power
was potentially not maximized. In addition, the Department did not submit
requests for reimbursement of federal fund expenditures in a timely manner.
Finally, the Department did not resolve timesheet discrepancies and independent
reviews of adjustments to leave balances were not performed.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that the Department did
not address those three findings, which are repeated in this report.
The Department’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
We reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and
related recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt, but prior to the
issuance of the final report, we contacted the Department and obtained verbal
clarification that satisfactorily resolved all outstanding questions and issues.
Consequently, we have concluded that the written responses and verbal
clarification together indicate that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to
address all audit issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Department and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement
appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational Change 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Procurements
* Finding 1 – The Military Department divided purchases of 7
certain goods and services in multiple procurements circumventing
control agency approvals and cardholder single transaction limits.
Consequently, the State’s purchasing power was potentially not
maximized.
Federal Funds
* Finding 2 – The Department did not always submit requests for 8
reimbursement of federal fund expenditures in a timely manner
resulting in lost interest income totaling at least $123,000 for the 10
transactions tested.
Payroll
* Finding 3 – The Department did not ensure all outstanding timesheet 9
discrepancies were resolved for the biweekly payroll, and that
adjustments to employee leave balances were subject to independent
review and approval.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Military Department maintains the Maryland National Guard within the State
of Maryland, including its 31 readiness centers and numerous other facilities used
by the Army and Air National Guard.
Prior to October 2021, the Department, through its Maryland Emergency
Management Agency (MEMA), coordinated Statewide efforts in the event of
emergencies and disasters that were beyond the capabilities of local authorities.
MEMA also coordinated disaster preparedness activities with its federal and local
counterparts and, through mitigation services, strived to reduce or eliminate the
impact of future disasters. Additionally, MEMA was responsible for
administrating loan and grant programs that provide funding to volunteer fire
companies for facilities and equipment. Effective October 1, 2021 legislation was
enacted transferring the functional elements of MEMA to a new independent
State agency, which will be subject to a separate audit by our Office.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2023, the Department’s
expenditures totaled approximately $46.9 million, consisting of federal fund
expenditures of $25.7 million, general fund expenditures of $13.5 million, and
special fund expenditures of $7.7 million (see Figure 1 on the following page).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
Military Department
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 209 88.9%
Frozen1 1 0.4%
Vacant 25 10.7%
Total 235
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $18,362,606 39.2%
Technical and Special Fees 1,443,532 3.1%
Operating Expenses 27,065,742 57.7%
Total $46,871,880
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $13,493,780 28.8%
Special Fund 7,706,161 16.4%
Federal Fund 25,671,939 54.8%
Total $46,871,880
Source: State financial and personnel records
Organizational Change
Effective October 1, 2021, Chapter 287, Laws of Maryland 2021 created the
Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM), an executive branch
agency of the State. The creation of MDEM transferred MEMA’s various
responsibilities and functions, such as the administration of Volunteer Company
Assistance Fund (VCAF) and the coordination with federal and local counterparts
for emergency and disaster preparedness, to MDEM. According to the State’s
records, as of September 30, 2021, the VCAF balance totaled approximately
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Agencies
were not authorized to fill frozen positions according to budgetary instructions from the
Department of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not
been filled since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
5

--- Page 8 ---
$32.9 million consisting of notes receivable due from volunteer fire companies
totaling $19.7 million and cash totaling $13.2 million. The activities of MEMA
until the aforementioned date were subject to review in this audit. The activities
of MDEM, beginning October 1, 2021, will be included in a separate audit of
MDEM.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 10, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2
below, we determined that the Department did not satisfactorily address any of
these prior findings all of which are repeated in this report.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Military Department did not always submit requests
Repeated
Finding 1 for reimbursement of federal fund expenditures in a
(Current Finding 2)
timely manner.
The Department divided purchases of certain equipment
Repeated
Finding 2 maintenance services into multiple procurements and
(Current Finding 1)
inflated the value of certain purchase orders.
Supervisory reviews of adjustments to leave balances
Repeated
Finding 3 were not documented and were not performed by an
(Current Finding 3)
independent employee.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements
Finding 1
The Department divided purchases of certain goods and services in multiple
procurements circumventing control agency approvals and cardholder single
transaction limits. Consequently, the State’s purchasing power was
potentially not maximized.
Analysis
The Department divided purchases of certain goods and services within the same
geographic region into multiple procurements. Consequently, control agency
approvals that would have been required of larger dollar value procurements were
circumvented and the State’s purchasing power was potentially not maximized.
According to State records, in fiscal year 2022, the Department processed 39
blanket purchase orders totaling $6 million and used corporate purchasing cards
(CPCs) for approximately 3,100 purchases totaling $1.4 million. We reviewed 18
blanket purchase orders totaling $648,000, each valued between $20,000 and
$50,000, with effective dates within our audit period. In addition, we reviewed 15
CPC purchases occurring during the audit period totaling $44,000.
 The Department artificially divided four purchases of services in the same
geographic region2 totaling approximately $312,000 into eight procurements
that were individually less than $50,000. For example, the Department
procured maintenance services in its central Maryland region through two
blanket purchase orders of $47,496 (procured February 8, 2021) and $47,376
(procured February 2, 2021), respectively, rather than attempt procurement of
a broader blanket purchase order. As a result, the Department circumvented
control agency approvals (such as the Department of General Services
(DGS)), that would have been required for contracts over $50,0003 and
potentially did not maximize the State’s purchasing power.
 The Department artificially divided 13 CPC purchases totaling $34,000 for
similar goods and maintenance services circumventing individual CPC
2 According to Board of Public Works advice the Department received in May 2022, while it may
not be feasible to consolidate procurements of similar goods and services in distant parts of the
State, similar procurements within the same geographic region, such as central Maryland, should
be consolidated.
3 Effective October 2023, the maximum dollar limit for small procurements increased from
$50,000 to $100,000, except for DGS and Maryland Department of Transportation construction
contracts where the limit increased to $200,000.
7

--- Page 10 ---
transaction limits. For example, two individual purchases to a vendor totaling
approximately $8,700 were processed for gutter installation services that
occurred on the same day at two separate buildings at the same armory.
According to the Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card
Policy and Procedures Manual, CPC transactions may not be split to
circumvent a card’s $5,000 transaction limit.
A similar condition regarding artificially divided purchases was noted in our
previous audit report. In response to that report, the Department agreed to
immediately implement our recommendation to discontinue the practice of
dividing procurements and consolidate procurements of similar services to
maximize purchasing power. During our current audit, we were advised that the
Department is waiting to consolidate similar procurements within the same
geographic region until the existing contracts expire, but as noted above continues
to split procurements.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Department
a. discontinue the practice of dividing procurements within the same
geographic region and consolidate procurements to maximize State
purchasing power (repeat), and
b. ensure CPC payments are made in accordance with the Manual.
Federal Funds
Finding 2
The Department did not always submit requests for reimbursement of
federal fund expenditures in a timely manner resulting in lost interest income
totaling at least $123,000 for the 10 transactions tested.
Analysis
The Department did not always submit requests for reimbursement of federal fund
expenditures related to National Guard Bureau (NGB) grants in a timely manner.
Federal guidelines for these grants permit reimbursements to be requested when
expenditures are incurred. According to the State’s records, between June 2019
and May 2023, NGB grant expenditures totaled $90.1 million.
Based on materiality, we selected 10 NGB grant reimbursement requests totaling
$19.7 million that were processed between June 2019 and May 2023. Our testing
disclosed that all 10 requests were submitted between 91 and 1,018 days after the
expenditures were incurred. For example, one request for reimbursement of $2.4
8

--- Page 11 ---
million that was incurred during September 2020 was not submitted until
September 2022. We determined that the untimely recovery of these funds from
the 10 grant reimbursement requests resulted in lost interest income to the State
totaling approximately $123,000.
A similar condition regarding untimely federal fund reimbursement requests was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to March 2016.
In response to our prior audit report, the Department advised us that it had
implemented periodic meetings to ensure all federal grant drawdown requests are
submitted timely. During our current audit, we were advised that these meetings
were discontinued because of staffing vacancies and because of added
responsibilities resulting from the COVID-19 public health emergency.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Department submit federal fund reimbursement
requests in a timely manner (repeat).
Payroll
Finding 3
The Department did not ensure all outstanding timesheet discrepancies were
resolved for the biweekly payroll, and that adjustments to employee leave
balances were subject to independent review and approval.
Analysis
The Department did not ensure all outstanding timesheet discrepancies were
resolved, and that adjustments to employee leave balances were subject to
independent review and approval. According to the State’s records, the
Department’s payroll expenditures totaled approximately $19.5 million in fiscal
year 2022.
Timesheet Discrepancies Were Not Resolved
The Department did not investigate and resolve all timesheet discrepancies. To
assist in biweekly payroll processing, the State’s Statewide Personnel System
(SPS) generates several reports to help State agencies identify, investigate, and
correct timesheet errors and other discrepancies, such as employee timesheets
with no time entered, submitted, or approved. If errors and discrepancies are not
resolved by the deadline for submission to the Department of Budget and
Management’s Office of Personnel Services and Benefits, the payroll must still be
submitted and the related pay will be processed but agencies must go back and
address any unresolved items.
9

--- Page 12 ---
We generated SPS reports that identified all unresolved timesheets discrepancies
within our audit period as of June 2023, such as revisions to timesheets that were
not approved. Specifically, the reports identified 102 employees with 2,283 hours
that were not approved.
Our test of 10 of these employees disclosed that 8 employees revised their
timesheets by 256.5 hours after the timesheets were initially approved and those
subsequent revisions had not been approved, as of June 2023 for periods ranging
between 14 and 45 months. Such an extended delay in approving timesheets calls
into question the adequacy of the review.
Leave Balance Adjustments Were Not Reviewed
Independent reviews of adjustments to leave balances were not performed.
According to State records, during the audit period the Department processed 920
leave adjustments that increased employee leave balances by 30,280 hours. Our
review disclosed that the Department did not have a process to independently
review the adjustments made to ensure they were proper. Our test of 10 leave
adjustments that increased employee leave balances by 1,150 hours for pay
periods ending between August 2019 and December 2023 did not identify any
improper adjustments.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report where we
noted that the review was not performed by an independent employee and was not
documented. In response to that report, the Department indicated that it modified
its procedures to require a documented independent review of leave adjustments.
However, as noted above, this review is no longer performed. We were advised
by Department personnel that although a report of leave adjustments is generated,
documentation supporting the adjustments was not readily available to verify the
accuracy of the adjustments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Department
a. develop procedures to ensure that all outstanding payroll discrepancies
are timely resolved;
b. resolve the payroll discrepancies identified on the reports, including those
noted in this finding; and
c. perform a documented independent review of leave adjustments, at least
on a test basis, to ensure that only authorized adjustments have been
processed (repeat).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Military Department for the
period beginning May 21, 2019 and ending June 15, 2023. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Department’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal fund reimbursements, cash receipts,
payroll, procurements and disbursements, and equipment. We also determined
the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of the Department’s compliance with those law and regulations
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including the
Department.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 21, 2019 to June 15, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Department’s operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
11

--- Page 14 ---
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Department’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Department, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Department’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
12

--- Page 15 ---
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Department that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as
an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX
WES MOORE STATE OF MARYLAND JANEEN L. BIRCKHEAD
GOVERNOR MAJOR GENERAL
MILITARY DEPARTMENT
COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF THE ADJUTANT GENERAL
FIFTH REGIM ENT ARMORY
BALTIMORE, MAR YLAND 21201-2288
June 20, 2024
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
Suite 400, 351 West Camden Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed are the responses to the draft audit report of the Military Department for the period
beginning May 21, 2019, and ending June 15, 2023.
While I appreciate the audit team for their efforts in bringing conditions within the Military
Department that require corrective action to my attention, it should be noted that I was
appointed as Adjutant General in April 2023. The “significant deficiencies in the design or
operation of internal control and the Department’s ability to maintain reliable financial
records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules,
and regulations” did not occur under my leadership.
The Military Department will move forward with corrective actions to ensure the effectiveness
and efficiency of its operations and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations.

--- Page 17 ---
-2-
If there are any questions or additional information is desired, please contact Dr. Linda Weaver
at (443) 500-8667 or linda.weaver3@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Janeen L. Birckhead
Major General, MDARNG
The Adjutant General
cc:
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D.
Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brigadier General Andrew Collins, Deputy Adjutant General
Mr. Richard Turcot, Acting Chief of Staff

--- Page 18 ---
Military Department
Agency Response Form
Procurements
Finding 1
The Department divided purchases of certain goods and services in multiple
procurements circumventing control agency approvals and cardholder single
transaction limits. Consequently, the State’s purchasing power was
potentially not maximized.
We recommend that the Department
a. discontinue the practice of dividing procurements within the same
geographic region and consolidate procurements to maximize State
purchasing power (repeat), and
b. ensure CPC payments are made in accordance with the Manual.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MMD concurs with the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025
Please provide details of MMD undertakes corrective action by contracting by region and not by
corrective action or individual armory location. MMD will utilize the State of Maryland’s Small
explain disagreement. Business Reserve Program for smaller procurements when possible.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept 30, 2024
Please provide details of MMD will establish a new policy to ensure CPC users complies with the MD
corrective action or State CPC Policy and Procedures Manual, including loss of the CPC and
explain disagreement. disciplinary action for repeat violations. MMD will conduct training for CPC
holders on the new policy and procedures and update their position descriptions
to include CPC responsibilities.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 19 ---
Military Department
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 2
The Department did not always submit requests for reimbursement of
federal fund expenditures in a timely manner resulting in lost interest income
totaling at least $123,000 for the 10 transactions tested.
We recommend that the Department submit federal fund reimbursement
requests in a timely manner (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MMD concurs with the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025
Please provide details of MMD received Over-the-Target funding to purchase a software system that
corrective action or will automate the reimbursement process.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 20 ---
Military Department
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 3
The Department did not ensure all outstanding timesheet discrepancies were
resolved for the biweekly payroll, and that adjustments to employee leave
balances were subject to independent review and approval.
We recommend that the Department
a. develop procedures to ensure that all outstanding payroll discrepancies
are timely resolved;
b. resolve the payroll discrepancies identified on the reports, including those
noted in this finding; and
c. perform a documented independent review of leave adjustments, at least
on a test basis, to ensure that only authorized adjustments have been
processed (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide There is no guidance or policy from SPS on the frequency for running
additional comments as the payroll processing, No Time Entered, Unsubmitted and Unapproved
deemed necessary. reports. However, MMD does run the reports bi-weekly to ensure all
discrepancies are cleared before payroll is processed.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec 31, 2024
Please provide details of To ensure process improvement, MMD will implement an SOP which
corrective action or will outline the appropriate steps to minimize changes to timesheets post
explain disagreement. completion of payroll.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Oct 31, 2024
Please provide details of MMD will ensure all authorized adjustments have been resolved by
corrective action or implementing a dual review process before payroll is submitted.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Oct 31, 2024
Please provide details of MMD will implement a review two-step process SOP. All authorized
corrective action or leave adjustments will be reviewed by a timekeeper and a timekeeper
explain disagreement. approver.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Senior Auditor
Jammie A. Brown
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditors