Title: State Archives
Date: 06/27/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66841b015f05f8ce30f5bce4
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:07:57.828569
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Archives
June 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 27, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Archives for the period
beginning January 21, 2020 and ending October 31, 2023. The State Archives is
the central depository for Maryland permanent government records and for certain
designated private records, and is responsible for preserving and maintaining
certain artwork and historical documents of cultural significance.
Our audit disclosed that the State Archives did not have adequate accountability
and controls over its equipment inventory. Specifically, the State Archives could
not provide documentation that physical inventories were conducted annually for
sensitive items and every three years for non-sensitive items during our audit
period. In addition, we identified 127 sensitive inventory items, valued at
approximately $463,200, which had not been recorded in the equipment records.
The State Archives’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this
report. We reviewed the response to our finding and related recommendations,
and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address
all audit issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
State Archives. We also wish to acknowledge the State Archives’ willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Archives is an independent unit of State government within the
Executive Branch. The State Archives’ central mission is to identify, appraise,
acquire, describe, preserve, and make electronically available the permanent
records of the past. The State Archives serves as the central depository for
Maryland permanent government records and certain designated private records
of permanent value, and is responsible for preserving and maintaining a collection
of artwork and historical documents of cultural significance. The State Archives
maintains a digital copy of all land records and updates the Maryland Manual
Online website. According to the State’s records, total State Archives
expenditures were approximately $9.6 million during fiscal year 2023 (see Figure
1).
Figure 1
State Archives Positions, Expenditures, and
Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 59 95.2%
Vacant 3 4.8%
Total 62
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $6,353,646 65.9%
Technical and Special Fees 493,086 5.1%
Operating Expenses 2,790,019 29.0%
Total $9,636,751
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $7,441,642 77.2%
Special Fund 2,134,645 22.2%
Federal Fund 57,466 0.6%
Reimbursable Fund 2,998 0.0%
Total Expenditure $9,636,751
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Equipment
Finding 1
The State Archives did not conduct periodic physical inventories and
maintain complete detail records of equipment in accordance with State
policy.
Analysis
The State Archives did not have adequate accountability and controls over its
equipment inventory. The State Archives maintained its equipment inventory in
the Fixed Asset System (FAS) of the State’s Financial Management Information
System. According to FAS, as of October 2023, the equipment balance totaled
approximately $6.5 million including 900 sensitive equipment items, such as
computers, with a recorded cost of approximately $5.9 million, and 132 non-
sensitive equipment items with a recorded cost of $560,000.
 The State Archives did not conduct physical inventories timely. The State
Archives reported to the Department of General Services (DGS) in September
2023 that its most recent physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive
equipment had not been since June 2021 and June 2017, respectively.
However, the State Archives lacked documentation, such as count sheets, that
those physicals inventories were performed or that results were reconciled to
the detail records.
 The State Archives did not maintain complete inventory records. Our
comparison of inventory items recorded in FAS to a separate inventory listing
maintained for one unit in the State Archives identified 127 sensitive
inventory items1, valued at approximately $436,200, that were not recorded in
FAS. In addition, we judgmentally selected 18 purchases of equipment
between August 2022 and October 2023 totaling $322,500 for testing which
disclosed 5 equipment items totaling $176,0002, that were not recorded in
FAS.
 The State Archives did not maintain a proper equipment control account.
Specifically, although a spreadsheet of equipment purchases and disposals
was maintained, this spreadsheet did not include beginning or ending total
1 This included 9 items, totaling approximately $147,300, which were subsequently disposed but
had never been recorded in FAS prior to their disposal.
2 These 5 equipment items were different than the 127 equipment items identified in our analysis.
4

--- Page 7 ---
equipment balances. As a result, the spreadsheet could not be reconciled to
the detail records to ensure that all equipment purchases and disposals were
properly reflected in the detail records.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires the inventory records to include all
capital equipment purchases and that physical inventories be conducted annually
for sensitive items and every three years for non-sensitive items. Furthermore, the
Manual requires an independent control account be maintained on a current basis
and it should be periodically reconciled with the detail records.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the State Archives comply with the Manual and
a. conduct independent physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive
equipment inventory, as required;
b. ensure the inventory detail records are complete; and
c. establish an equipment control account and periodically reconcile the
control account to the detail records.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Archives for the period
beginning January 21, 2020 and ending October 31, 2023. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the State
Archives’ financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, purchasing and disbursements,
payroll, equipment (including artistic property), the State Archives Fund, and the
Archives Endowment Fund.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 21, 2020 to October 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the State Archives’ operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results of any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot
be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test items
were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the inventory system for the purpose of testing
equipment inventory. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The State Archives’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
6

--- Page 9 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the State Archives,
were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the State Archives’ ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also considered a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the State Archives that did not warrant inclusion
in this report.
The State Archives’ response to our finding and recommendations is included as
an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the State
Archives regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 11 ---
State Archives
Agency Response Form
Equipment
Finding 1
The State Archives did not conduct periodic physical inventories and
maintain complete detail records of equipment in accordance with State
policy.
We recommend that the State Archives comply with the Manual and
a. conduct independent physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive
equipment inventory, as required;
b. ensure the inventory detail records are complete; and
c. establish an equipment control account and periodically reconcile the
control account to the detail records.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of Non-sensitive equipment inventory will be completed by the Fiscal
corrective action or Accounts Officer no later than 6/30/24. Sensitive inventory will be
explain disagreement. completed by IT property officer no later than 6/30/24. Both
inventories will be reconciled with the FAS inventory. Property
Officer will prepare Lost/Stolen Property Declaration to report any
missing items.
A fully reconciled inventory will be uploaded in a new inventory
system (yet to be chosen).
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/2024
Please provide details of In consultation with ISSSD, State Archives will complete a full
corrective action or reconciliation of the inventory no later than 7/15/24. State Archives
explain disagreement. will improve its processes to identify inventoried/capitalized
equipment starting in the procurement life cycle. State Archives will
report any Lost/Stolen Property in accordance with state guidelines.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of Deputy Director will establish and maintain a control account in
corrective action or accordance with ISSSD guidelines. State Archives will reconcile the
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
State Archives
Agency Response Form
control account to the detail records quarterly. Corrective actions
will be taken as necessary.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
John B. Wachter, CFE
Senior Auditor
Kevin M. Billard
Staff Auditor