Title: Maryland Department of Health - Prevention and Health Promotion Administration - Office of Population Health Improvement - Office of Preparedness and Response - Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation
Date: 08/09/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66bb9e1d2e599da74df3ef13
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:08:27.254443
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Office of Population Health Improvement
Office of Preparedness and Response
Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation
August 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 9, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) –Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA), Office
of Population Health Improvement (OPHI), Office of Preparedness and Response
(OPR), and Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation (OPER) for the period
beginning October 21, 2019, and ending June 30, 2023.
Our audit disclosed that certain inspections were not conducted in a timely
manner. Specifically, PHPA did not conduct timely inspections of food-
processing facilities to ensure they were complying with applicable food safety
regulations and OPER did not conduct timely inspections of assisted living
facilities licensed to dispense controlled dangerous substances (CDS).
Our audit also disclosed that OPR did not establish adequate controls over its
inventory of equipment and supplies stored for use during public health
emergencies. In March 2020, OPR began storing equipment and supplies and
distributing these items to Local Health Departments and other entities (such as
hospitals). According to a count conducted in July 2023, the estimated value of
its inventory totaled approximately $193.2 million.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that two of these three
findings were satisfactorily addressed. The remaining finding is repeated in this
report.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of PHPA, OPHI, OPR and OPER, is
included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings
and related recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt, but prior to the

--- Page 4 ---
issuance of the final report, we contacted MDH and obtained verbal clarification
that satisfactorily resolved all outstanding questions and issues. Consequently, we
have concluded that the written responses and verbal clarification together
indicate that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. In accordance with our policy, we have edited the response to remove
vendor names or products.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by MDH and the applicable administration and offices, and their collective
willingness to address the current audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Ransomware Security Incident 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Food Protection Program
* Finding 1 – The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration did 8
not conduct timely inspections to ensure food-processing facilities
were operating in accordance with State regulations.
Controlled Dangerous Substance Inspections
Finding 2 – The Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation did not 9
inspect all assisted living facilities licensed to dispense controlled
dangerous substances timely.
Office of Preparedness and Response (OPR) Equipment and Supplies
Finding 3 – OPR did not establish adequate controls over its inventory 11
of equipment and supplies stored for use during public health
emergencies.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 16
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of June
2024
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA), the Office of
Population Health Improvement (OPHI), the Office of Preparedness and
Response (OPR), and the Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation (OPER)
are units within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH).
 PHPA protects, promotes, and improves the health and well-being of
Marylanders and their families through the provision of public health
leadership and community-based public health efforts, including partnerships
with local health departments, with special attention to at-risk and vulnerable
populations. PHPA provides State grant funding to the local health
departments for various public health initiatives related to maternal and child
health, cancer and chronic disease, and environmental health and infectious
disease. PHPA administers several programs including the Maryland AIDS
Drug Assistance Program, Food Protection Program, and the Breast and
Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program.
 OPHI maintains and improves the health of Marylanders by assuring access
to and quality of primary care services and school health programs, and by
supporting local health systems.
 OPR organizes and prepares for public health and medical emergencies
through statewide partnerships with public, private, and government agencies
to coordinate an effective emergency response for the health and safety of all
Maryland residents. OPR is responsible for the receipt, storage, and
distribution of critical equipment and supplies during times of emergency
through the federal Strategic National Stockpile Program. As noted in
Finding 1, OPR’s operations related to this Program significantly expanded in
March 2020 because of the COVID-19 public health emergency.
 OPER provides support for prescribers and dispensers to promote
professional education and best practices so that Maryland patients experience
optimal access, efficacy, and safety in connection with controlled substances.
OPER is responsible for issuing Controlled Dangerous Substances (CDS)
permits to practitioners, researchers, and establishments that administer,
prescribe, dispense, distribute, manufacture, and conduct research of CDS.
OPER is also responsible for the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
which collects and stores information on CDS dispensed to patients in
Maryland.
4

--- Page 7 ---
According to State records, during fiscal year 2023, expenditures for PHPA,
OPHI, OPR, and OPER totaled approximately $524.9 million, $137.0 million,
$460.2 million, and $3.1 million, respectively (see Figure 1).
Figure 1
PHPA, OPHI, OPR, and OPER
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
PHPA OPHI OPR OPER Percent
Filled 406 12 25 18 89.0%
Vacant 48 2 2 5 11.0%
Total 454 14 27 23
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Salaries, Wages
and Fringe
Benefits $ 50,713,954 $ 1,649,302 $101,114,3551 $2,287,751 13.9%
Technical and
Special Fees 9,985,678 226,387 2,376,115 103,716 1.1%
Operating
Expenses 464,204,297 135,082,002 356,708,437 670,109 85.0%
Total $524,903,929 $136,957,691 $460,198,907 $3,061,576
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
General Fund $ 76,287,977 $111,164,733 $ 3,566,720 $2,655,352 17.2%
Special Fund 149,111,153 3,972,514 259,826,378 58,957 36.7%
Federal Fund 240,740,254 11,075,339 15,367,304 198,474 23.8%
Reimbursable
Fund 3,189,455 0 0 148,793 0.3%
COVID Related
Funding 55,575,090 10,745,105 181,438,505 0 22.0%
Total $524,903,929 $136,957,691 $460,198,907 $3,061,576
Source: State financial and personnel records
1 The majority of the Special and COVID Related Funding under OPR’s expenditures was for
activity administered by MDH Office of the Secretary and other State agencies. Similarly,
OPR’s total Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits reflected in Figure 1 is comprised of $2.4
million for OPR’s 25 positions and $98.7 million related to staff working at other State agencies.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Ransomware Security Incident
In December 2021, MDH experienced a broad security incident resulting from a
ransomware attack.2 This incident affected the entire MDH computer network
and disrupted information technology operations for all MDH servers and end
user computers, resulting in substantial impact on all MDH business operations
including PHPA, OPHI, OPR and OPER. MDH notified the Department of
Information Technology’s (DoIT) Office of Security Management, which
initiated incident response measures. Various other parties were informed of this
incident or engaged for recovery efforts. DoIT concluded that no evidence
existed indicating that sensitive or regulated information had been improperly
acquired.
The incident response measures, and related controls were subject to review as
part of our recent audit of the MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units. The
incident did not significantly impact our audit, and we were able to obtain
information needed to satisfy our audit objectives and related conclusions.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report on PHPA, OPHI, OPR, and OPER dated February
23, 2021. As disclosed in Figure 2 (on the following page), we determined that
two of these findings were satisfactorily addressed. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
2 As defined by the federal Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
PHPA did not monitor a State grant to the
University of Maryland Medical System related to
Finding 1 the former Prince George’s Hospital Center with Not Repeated
funding totaling $55 million for fiscal years 2018
and 2019.
OPER had not established adequate controls over
Finding 2 controlled dangerous substance permits and related Not Repeated
collections.
PHPA did not conduct timely inspections to ensure
Repeated
Finding 3 food-processing facilities were operating in
(Current Finding 1)
accordance with State regulations.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Food Protection Program
Finding 1
The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA) did not
conduct timely inspections to ensure food-processing facilities were operating
in accordance with State regulations.
Analysis
PHPA did not conduct timely inspections of food-processing facilities to ensure
the facilities were complying with applicable State food safety regulations. PHPA
licenses and inspects food-processing facilities (such as food manufacturing
plants, warehouses, shellfish plants, and food transportation vehicles) to promote
the safety of food processed in Maryland. State regulations generally require
inspections to be performed quarterly, semi-annually, annually, or biennially,
based upon the risk associated with the type of food-processing facility.
According to agency records, there were 1,003 active food-processing facilities
requiring an inspection as of June 30, 2023.
Our test of 30 arbitrarily selected food manufacturing facilities disclosed that
inspections were not always conducted timely in accordance with State
regulations. Specifically, 3 facilities that required semi-annual inspections were
between 1 to 8 months overdue for an inspection as of June 30, 2023. In addition,
although 27 of the 30 facilities tested had completed current inspections, 11 of the
inspections were performed at least one month late, including 8 that were
conducted between 6 months to 1 year after the inspection was due.
This condition may have been caused, in part, because PHPA did not maintain a
complete and accurate scheduling sheet to monitor the timeliness of these
inspections. Specifically, our review disclosed that certain information (such as
the inspection date and license type) was not always accurately recorded on the
scheduling sheet. For example, the aforementioned test of 30 inspections
disclosed that the dates recorded on the scheduling sheet for 13 inspections did
not accurately reflect the date the actual inspection occurred. Without an accurate
scheduling sheet, PHPA did not have an effective mechanism to ensure that food-
processing facilities were inspected in a timely manner.
PHPA’s failure to conduct the required inspections was commented upon in our
two preceding audit reports of PHPA dating back to April 4, 2018. MDH’s
response to our preceding audit report, on behalf of PHPA, indicated that PHPA
planned to implement an information management system by December 31, 2022
8

--- Page 11 ---
to help monitor and ensure inspections are being performed timely. However, as
of August 2023, this system had not been implemented and PHPA was relying on
the aforementioned scheduling sheet to monitor inspections.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PHPA
a. take the necessary actions to ensure that food-processing facility
inspections are conducted timely, in accordance with State regulations
(repeat); and
b. maintain complete and accurate scheduling information to monitor the
timeliness of these inspections.
Controlled Dangerous Substance Inspections
Finding 2
The Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation (OPER) did not conduct
required biennial inspections of assisted living facilities licensed to dispense
controlled dangerous substances (CDS).
Analysis
OPER did not conduct biennial inspections of all assisted living facilities licensed
to dispense CDS3 as required by its policy. OPER conducts inspections to ensure
that licensed establishments complied with regulatory requirements for the
physical security and accountability of CDS. For example, licensed
establishments are required to have effective controls and procedures to guard
against theft and unlawful diversion of controlled dangerous substances.
According to OPER records, as of June 30, 2023, there were 2,702 establishments
subject to inspection, including 1,233 pharmacies and 782 assisted living
facilities.
3 Controlled dangerous substances are drugs or substances listed in Federal Drug Schedule I
through Schedule V (for example, fentanyl and oxycodone).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Our analysis of OPER pharmacy and Figure 3
assisted living facility inspection Overdue Inspections
records as of June 30, 2023, disclosed
as of June 30, 2023
that although pharmacies were
Number of
generally inspected as required, 455 of Range of Overdue
Assisted Living
the 782 assisted living facilities (or 58 Inspections
Facilities
percent) were at least one year overdue
1 to 3 years 284
for inspection (see Figure 3). OPER
3 to 6 years 89
primarily attributed this backlog to the
> 6 years 82
COVID-19 public health emergency
Total 455
and the aforementioned ransomware
Source: OPER Records
security incident. OPER advised that it
plans to hire additional inspectors to
resolve the backlog.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPER take the necessary actions to ensure that
inspections of assisted living facilities are conducted timely.
Office of Preparedness and Response (OPR) Equipment and
Supplies
Background
During the audit period, OPR’s operations significantly expanded because of the
COVID-19 public health emergency. Specifically, in March 2020, OPR began
storing equipment and supplies and distributing these items to local health
departments and other entities (such as hospitals). Prior to COVID-19, OPR was
only responsible for coordinating distributions of these items from the federal
government without taking physical possession of the equipment and supplies.
Based on a complete count performed in July 2023, OPR’s inventory had an
estimated value of approximately $193.2 million (see Figure 4 on the following
page).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 4
OPR Inventory as of July 2023
Estimated
Count of Value of
Type Examples of Items
Items Items
(in millions)
Beds, medical monitors,
Equipment 458,770 $ 57.8
ventilators, heaters, radios
Rapid COVID tests,
Supplies 153,020,624 135.4
masks, gowns, syringes
Total 153,479,394 $193.2
Source: OPR’s physical inventory and State records
Finding 3
OPR did not establish adequate controls over its inventory of equipment and
supplies stored for use during public health emergencies.
Analysis
OPR did not establish adequate controls over its inventory of equipment and
supplies stored for use during public health emergencies. Our review as of
October 2023 disclosed the following conditions:
 OPR’s equipment and supplies inventory records were not accurate and
reliable. Specifically, the detail inventory records did not accurately reflect
the number of items on hand, their location, and other required information
such as the identification number and acquisition cost. OPR advised that the
inventory records were generally not updated due to the volume of equipment
and supplies received and distributed during the COVID-19 public health
emergency.
 Prior to July 2023, OPR had not conducted any of the required physical
inventories of equipment and supplies. In July 2023, OPR conducted a
complete count of the equipment and supplies on hand, which identified
approximately 153 million supply items and 459,000 equipment items (see
Figure 4 above). However, OPR did not reconcile the results with the detail
records or investigate differences between the inventory and the detail
records. OPR advised that due to the unreliable and incomplete inventory
records, it intended to adjust the inventory records to reflect the results of the
count but had not made the adjustment as of October 2023.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 OPR did not maintain an equipment control account to ensure that the detail
records accurately reflected the equipment balances.
The Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual requires
agencies to maintain detail inventory records that accurately reflect the equipment
and supplies on hand. The Manual also requires that physical inventories of both
equipment and supplies be conducted periodically. It further requires that an
independent equipment control account be maintained on a current basis and be
periodically reconciled with the detail records.
Similar concerns were noted in our December 2021 Review of Certain Emergency
Procurements Related to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 Response and in the
federal Single Audit for fiscal year ending June 30, 2022.4 Our December 2021
review did not include recommendations, and as such, OPR was not required to
provide a written response to the finding. However, OPR’s response to the Single
Audit indicated that it was procuring a new inventory system and developing
formal procedures to comply with the DGS Inventory Control Manual. As of
October 2023, OPR had not procured a new inventory system, and had not
developed formal procedures and processes related to inventory accountability
and recordkeeping.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OPR comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, OPR should
a. ensure the detail records of equipment and supplies accurately reflect the
items on hand and include all required information,
b. conduct periodic physical inventories of equipment and supplies and
reconcile the results to the detail records, and
c. maintain an independent equipment control account.
4 The Single Audit is performed by independent auditors under contract with the State of
Maryland and is intended to provide assurance to the federal government that adequate internal
controls are in place, and the entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning October 21,
2019 and ending June 30, 2023.
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA)
Office of Population Health Improvement (OPHI)
Office of Preparedness and Response (OPR)
Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation (OPER)
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the respective
MDH units’ financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate
its compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain grants and contracts (except as described
below), warehouse operations, food protection, controlled dangerous substances,
system security, and certain HIV operations. We also determined the status of the
three findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by MDH’s Office of
the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance
of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope
of our audit of the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units. Furthermore,
responsibilities related to grants awarded to local health departments are divided
between the MDH – Office of the Secretary and the various administrations. Our
audit included a review of the calculations of amounts awarded which is the
responsibility of the administrations, but did not include other responsibilities
related to these grant awards such as ensuring the grant funds are expended in
accordance with the related agreements which is within the scope of our audit of
MDH – Office of the Secretary. In addition, our audit did not include a review of
13

--- Page 16 ---
prescription rebates because they were included within the scope of our audit of
MDH – Pharmacy Services.
Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance
with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of compliance with those laws and regulations by MDH and its units
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including MDH.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 21, 2019 to June 30, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of operations at the respective MDH
units. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgment, which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the
transaction, or the significance of the transaction to the area of operation
reviewed. As a matter of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so
unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is
specifically indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or
disclosed by us cannot be used to project those results to the entire population
from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDH’s management at the respective units is responsible for establishing and
maintaining effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of
financial records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including
14

--- Page 17 ---
safeguarding of assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there
are five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment,
control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the
five components, when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the
respective MDH units, were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the respective MDH unit’s ability to maintain reliable financial
records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to the respective MDH units that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of PHPA, OPHI, OPR and OPER, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its
response.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of June 2024 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
1 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center
2 State Psychiatric Hospital Centers  Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
 Springfield Hospital Center
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review
3 Health Regulatory Commissions Commission 01/25/24
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
Medical Care Programs Managed Care Program, known as
4 Administration - Managed Care HealthChoice including oversight of the nine 12/14/23
Program private Managed Care Organizations
Medical Care Programs
5 Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/23
Administration
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director
for Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and Other
6 Disabilities 10/19/23
Units
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
7 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
Developmental Disabilities
8 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Administration
Behavioral Health Administration and
 Behavioral Health Administration
Medical Care Programs
 Medical Care Programs Administration
9 Administration - Administrative 10/25/22
Administrative Service Organization for
Service Organization for Behavioral
Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
10 10/24/22
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of June 2024 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institutes for Children and Children and Adolescents
11 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
12 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
 22 Health Professional Boards and
13 Regulatory Services Commissions 01/19/21
 Office of Health Care Quality
14 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
 Kidney Disease Program
15 Pharmacy Services 08/31/20
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance
Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis
and Treatment Program
17

--- Page 20 ---
APPENDIX
August 6,2024
Mr.BrianS. Tanen,CPA, CFE
LegislativeAuditor
Officeof LegislativeAudits
TheWarehouseatCamdenYards
351WestCamdenStreet,Suite400
Baltimore,MD 21201
DearMr.Tanen:
Enclosed,pleasefindtheresponses tothedraftauditreportontheMarylandDepartmentof
Health–PreventionandHealthPromotionAdministration- Officeof PopulationHealth
Improvement- Officeof PreparednessandResponse - Officeof ProviderEngagementand
Regulationfor theperiodbeginningOctober21,2019andendingJune 30,2023.
If you haveanyquestions,pleasecontactFrederickD. Doggettat410-767-0885 or emailat
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., M.P.H.
Secretary
Enclosures
cc: ErinK. McMullen,R.N., Chiefof Staff, MDH
MarieGrant,AssistantSecretaryfor HealthPolicy,MDH
NileshKalyanaraman,M.D., DeputySecretary,PublicHealthServices,MDH
ErinS. Penniston,Chiefof Staff, PublicHealthServices,MDH
ElizabethEdsallKromm,Ph.D., Director,PHPA
CourtneyMcFadden,DeputyDirector,PHPA
KimberlyA. Hiner,Director,OPHI
SaraBarra,Director,OPR
Ana C.Lazarides,ActingDirector,OPER
SandraA. Yankosky,ActingDeputyDirector,OPER
FrederickD. Doggett,Director,InternalControls,AuditCompliance&Information
Security, MDH

--- Page 21 ---
DeneenToney,Deputy Director,Audit& Compliance,MDH
CarleanRhames-Jowers,Chief Auditor,InternalControls, AuditCompliance&
Information Security, MDH
2

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Office of Population Health Improvement
Office of Preparedness and Response
Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation
Agency Response Form
Food Protection Program
Finding 1
The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA) did not
conduct timely inspections to ensure food-processing facilities were operating
in accordance with State regulations.
We recommend that PHPA
a. take the necessary actions to ensure that food-processing facility inspections are
conducted timely, in accordance with State regulations (repeat); and
b. maintain complete and accurate scheduling information to monitor the
timeliness of these inspections.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/24
Please provide details The Department agrees. Please note that the response to prior findings in
of corrective action or this area included development of a new information management
explain disagreement. system and improved staffing. The Department has succeeded in
improving staffing levels, but to date has not been able to replace the
information system. The Department continues to work to identify a
technology solution.
To ensure timely inspections of firms, the Office Chief will conduct bi-
weekly reviews of the inspection spreadsheet with the Section Heads and
will redirect prioritization to High Risk firms followed by Moderate and
Low Risk. The review will allow the Office Chief and Section Heads to
assess inspection needs and ensure firms are inspected in a timely
fashion before they are overdue. The Program is also working to update
COMAR 10.15.04 to better reflect national inspection frequencies.
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Office of Population Health Improvement
Office of Preparedness and Response
Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation
Agency Response Form
Current inspection frequencies are:
● High Risk 1 x 6 months
● Moderate Risk 1 x 12 months
● Low Risk 1 x 24 months
New inspection frequencies will be:
● High Risk 1 x 12 months
● Moderate Risk 1 x 24 months
● Low Risk 1 x 36 months
Current FDA/national inspection frequencies are:
● High Risk 1 x every 3 years
● Non-High Risk 1 x every 5 years
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details PHPA will ensure that the information recorded on the scheduling sheet
of corrective action or used to monitor inspections is accurate.
explain disagreement.
Section Heads are required to review inspection reports and the
spreadsheet on a weekly basis at a minimum. Their position descriptions
will be updated to include properly reviewing and documenting
inspection spreadsheet reports as an essential function and will be
reviewed as part of their PEPs. The Program Chief has conducted a
quarterly internal audit by initially selecting a random sample of 10% of
each section head’s reviews (a total of 10% of all inspections) completed
throughout the previous quarter to review for accurate dates and details.
This review will be documented in the inspection spreadsheet. After two
quarters the percentage of inspections reviewed may be increased or
decreased by 5 percent, depending on the rate of errors identified in the
inspections.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Office of Population Health Improvement
Office of Preparedness and Response
Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation
Agency Response Form
Controlled Dangerous Substance Inspections
Finding 2
The Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation (OPER) did not conduct
required biennial inspections of assisted living facilities licensed to dispense
controlled dangerous substances (CDS).
We recommend that OPER take the necessary actions to ensure that
inspections of assisted living facilities are conducted timely.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/24
Please provide details of OPER agrees with the finding and will take necessary actions to ensure
corrective action or that inspections of assisted living facilities are conducted timely.
explain disagreement.
As the IT network incident has been resolved, the ALs have resumed in-
person visits from inspectors enabling inspections to be conducted
timely. OCSA has returned to normal operations. To meet the inspection
demands, OCSA has hired two new Clinical Pharmacist inspectors and is
in the process of recruiting one more inspector. A full staff of inspectors
will allow OCSA to increase the number of timely inspections at ALs.
OCSA anticipates having the remaining inspections completed by
December 31, 2024.
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Office of Population Health Improvement
Office of Preparedness and Response
Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation
Agency Response Form
Office of Preparedness and Response (OPR) Equipment and
Supplies
Finding 3
OPR did not establish adequate controls over its inventory of equipment and
supplies stored for use during public health emergencies.
We recommend that OPR comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, OPR should
a. ensure the detail records of equipment and supplies accurately reflect the
items on hand and include all required information,
b. conduct periodic physical inventories of equipment and supplies and
reconcile the results to the detail records, and
c. maintain an independent equipment control account.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of OP&R agrees to ensure the detailed inventory records accurately reflect
corrective action or the items on hand and include all required information. A 100% physical
explain disagreement. inventory has been completed and data entry into the inventory system is
completed as of June 20, 2024. The team has implemented a quality
assurance process to review and refine the inventory details and make
updates as needed to ensure all items are accurately reflected in the
inventory system.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Office of Population Health Improvement
Office of Preparedness and Response
Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of OP&R agrees and has complied with DGS ICM guidance in support of
corrective action or periodic physical inventories, accounting for 10% monthly or at least
explain disagreement. 25% quarterly. OP&R will maintain a quarterly schedule that will serve
as a contingency inspection schedule in recognition of real-life mission
events that may preclude monthly accountability activity.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of OP&R has maintained an equipment control account, as applicable,
corrective action or within its inventory management system and also an independent
explain disagreement. equipment control account per DGS ICM guidance.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor
Albert S. Kim
Chau D. Mai
Staff Auditors