Title: Maryland Department of Health - Pharmacy Services
Date: 08/09/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66bcc5a4160155e42a516429
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:08:37.366862
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
August 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simmonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 9, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) pharmacy services for the period beginning July 1, 2019 to
December 31, 2022. MDH provides pharmacy services under the Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA) and the Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration (PHPA) as indicated through the following five programs:
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program (MCPA)
 Medicaid Managed Care Program (MCPA)
 Kidney Disease Program (PHPA)
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (PHPA)
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program (PHPA)
Our audit found that MCPA did not ensure that manually processed pharmacy
claims for the Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program were proper. While the
majority of pharmacy claims are paid at established rates, certain prescription
drugs require an MCPA employee to determine the allowable drug cost based on
criteria provided in State regulations, and to manually record the price into
MDH’s point-of-sale system to process the claim. Our test of 15 manual claims
processed between June 2020 and November 2022 disclosed that 11 claims were
overpaid by approximately $397,000 because the employee who processed the
claim entered an amount that exceeded the allowable drug cost.
Our audit also found that MDH had not established procedures to ensure that
prescribing providers were licensed prior to approving pharmacy claims for
payment. In addition, our audit disclosed that MCPA did not perform audits of
three of the four fee-for-service programs and did not use available data to
identify improper claims. The audits would perform manual verifications that are

--- Page 4 ---
not possible through MDH’s automated pharmacy claims processing system, such
as to ensure that a valid prescription was issued, properly filled, and actually
picked up by a recipient.
Furthermore, MDH’s controls over Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
drug rebates were not sufficient, resulting in significant rebates not being obtained
timely. MDH receives prescription drug rebates under two federal programs
which are paid by drug manufacturers for covered outpatient drugs dispensed to
approved clients under each MDH program that provides pharmacy services. Our
audit disclosed that MDH did not ensure that drug manufacturers provided timely
and proper drug rebate payments and as a result did not pursue collection of
certain outstanding rebates, including $1.5 million in rebates outstanding for at
least one year.
Our audit also disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report. Specifically, State
law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a
manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is made available
to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we
have determined that the redacted finding falls under the referenced definition.
The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were previously communicated to those
parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that MDH satisfactorily addressed three of those six
findings. The remaining three findings are repeated in this report.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of MCPA and PHPA, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our
findings and related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of
MDH’s response which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that
these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MDH’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MCPA and PHPA. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s, MCPA’s, and PHPA’s
willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective
actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope 7
Ransomware Security Incident 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 12
Claims Processing
Finding 1 – The Medical Care Programs Administration did not ensure 12
manually processed pharmacy claims were proper, resulting in
overpayments of approximately $397,000 related to 11 of the 15 claims
we tested.
* Finding 2 – The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) did not have 13
procedures to ensure that prescribing providers were licensed prior
to approving pharmacy claims for payment.
* Finding 3 – MDH did not audit three of the four fee-for-service 15
programs’ pharmacy claims, did not analyze claim reversals, and did
not use available drug utilization claims data to identify improper
claims.
Rebates
* Finding 4 – MDH did not ensure that drug manufacturers provided timely 18
and proper drug rebate payments for the Maryland AIDS Drug
Assistance Program.
System Security
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 20
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 25
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of June
2024
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH), through its Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA) and Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
(PHPA), operates four significant fee-for-service programs under which they pay
for prescription drugs:
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
 Kidney Disease Program
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program
In addition, pharmacy claims are paid by the nine Managed Care Organizations
(MCOs) under contract with the State under the Medicaid Managed Care
Program. Each of the five programs provide pharmaceutical benefits to eligible
recipients and is administered independently.
The scope of this pharmacy audit included the administration and monitoring of
claims adjudication and processing, security and controls, reimbursement rates,
audits, and rebate management under the aforementioned four fee-for-service
programs. According to MDH records, fiscal year 2022 claim payments for these
four programs totaled $631 million (see Figure 1 on page 8). Additionally, the
scope included the rebate management and monitoring of the nine MCOs.
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA)
MCPA operates under both Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act
(Medicaid) and State law. Medicaid is a joint federal and State entitlement
program for low-income individuals. The program is administered by the states,
which are required to provide healthcare coverage, including optional pharmacy
services, to all applicants who meet the program’s eligibility criteria.
MCPA administers the Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program (MMPP) which
provides pharmacy services to Medicaid recipients through a fee-for-service
business model. MMPP has oversight of all policies and operations related to
pharmacy services such as claims processing, preferred drug listing, and
reimbursement methodology. MMPP covers all point-of-sale pharmacy services
for fee-for-service recipients carved out of the MCO benefits.
MCPA also oversees the Medicaid Managed Care Program which provides
pharmacy services to Medicaid recipients who are enrolled in the Managed Care
7

--- Page 10 ---
Program. MCPA contracts with MCOs to provide healthcare, including pharmacy
services, to enrolled Medicaid recipients in exchange for specified capitation
payments.1 Each MCO independently contracted with one of six Pharmacy
Benefit Managers that were responsible for administering virtually all aspects of
the MCO pharmacy activities including pharmacy network management, claims
processing, and payments to the pharmacies.
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA)
PHPA protects, promotes, and improves the health and well-being of Marylanders
and their families through the provision of public health leadership and
community-based public health efforts. PHPA administers three programs with
pharmacy services:
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (MADAP) – MADAP is a state
and territory-administered program authorized under Part B of the Ryan White
HIV/AIDS Program, a federal program codified under Title XXVI of the
Public Health Services Act. MADAP helps low to moderate-income
Maryland residents with HIV disease who have limited or no coverage from
private insurance or Medicare pay for HIV/AIDS related drugs. Individuals
cannot be enrolled in both Medicaid and MADAP.
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program (BCCDTP) –
BCCDTP is a State-run program that provides breast cancer and cervical
cancer diagnostic and treatment services to eligible low-income Maryland
residents, including medical and pharmacy services.
 Kidney Disease Program (KDP) – KDP is a State-run program designed to
help low to moderate-income Maryland residents pay for the treatment costs
associated with end stage renal disease. KDP provides medical and pharmacy
services to eligible individuals and is a payer of last resort after all other
options, such as private insurance, Medicare, and Medicaid have been
exhausted. Starting in October 2019, the administration of KDP was
transferred from MCPA to PHPA.
Pharmacy Vendor
Since August 2006, MDH has contracted with a pharmacy vendor to provide a
point-of-sale electronic claims management system (pharmacy vendor system).
The original contract was modified and extended multiple times and ultimately
ended May 31, 2021. In October 2019, MDH competitively awarded a contract
1 Capitation payments are included within the scope of our audit of MCPA’s Managed Care
Program.
8

--- Page 11 ---
valued at approximately $73.1 million (including renewal options) to the
incumbent pharmacy vendor to develop, implement, and operate a new pharmacy
vendor system. MDH continued to use its legacy system until the new pharmacy
vendor system was implemented in October 2022.
The new pharmacy vendor system includes pharmacy claims processing, where
claims submitted by pharmacies are adjudicated in real time for MMPP, MADAP,
BCCDTP, and KDP. Claims processing includes functionality such as
verifications of recipient eligibility, reviewing requests for prior authorizations,
and identifying other parties, such as private insurers, that may be responsible for
payment. Furthermore, the new pharmacy vendor system performs drug
utilization reviews and supports drug manufacturer rebate programs, such as by
capturing and reporting MDH’s detailed utilization activity to drug manufacturers
so that MDH can obtain rebates.
The pharmacy vendor system does not provide claims processing services to the
MCOs under the Medicaid Managed Care Program. Rather, each MCO is
responsible for maintaining its own system to process pharmacy claims.
However, the pharmacy vendor system is used to perform rebate processing for
MCO pharmacy claims.
Pharmacy Payments
MMPP, MADAP, BCCDTP, and KDP payments are based on a fee-for-service
model under which payments are made directly to pharmacies by MDH after
claims have been adjudicated through the pharmacy vendor system. During fiscal
year 2022, MDH paid approximately 5.2 million pharmacy claims totaling
approximately $631 million on behalf of 361,000 recipients. In addition, MDH
makes monthly capitation payments for each Medicaid recipient enrolled in the
MCO. According to agency records, the portion of capitation rates associated
with pharmacy services for calendar year 2022 totaled approximately $711.5
million.
Pharmacy Rebates
Certain drugs purchased under these programs and by MCOs were eligible for
drug manufacturer rebates. According to State accounting records, MDH
received rebates totaling approximately $402.2 million for its fee-for-service
pharmacy purchases during fiscal year 2022 (see Figure 1 on the following page)
and according to MDH records, it received $508 million in rebates for pharmacy
purchases made by MCOs during calendar year 2022. The rebate amount is based
on the total cost of the drug regardless of the portion paid by MDH, which
resulted in MADAP receiving rebates in excess of the amounts paid.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 1
Fiscal Year 2022 Fee-For-Service Claims and Rebates by Program
Number of Number of Claim Rebates Net
Program
Recipients Claims Payments Received Payments
MMPP 355,083 5,073,694 $597,193,372 $355,569,550 $241,623,822
MADAP 5,049 100,002 31,461,854 45,249,199 (13,787,345)
BCCDTP 314 2,270 1,763,151 783,900 979,251
KDP 759 14,553 626,493 583,298 43,195
Total 361,205 5,190,519 $631,044,870 $402,185,947 $228,858,923
Source: MDH records
Ransomware Security Incident
In December 2021, MDH experienced a broad security incident resulting from a
ransomware attack.2 This incident affected the entire MDH computer network
and disrupted information technology (IT) operations for all MDH servers and
end user computers, resulting in substantial impact on all MDH business
operations, including MCPA and PHPA. MDH notified the Department of
Information Technology’s (DoIT) Office of Security Management, which
initiated incident response measures. Various other parties were informed of this
incident or engaged for recovery efforts. DoIT concluded that no evidence
existed indicating that sensitive or regulated information had been improperly
acquired.
The incident, response measures, and related controls were subject to review as
part of our recent audit of the MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units
(report dated October 19, 2023). This incident did not significantly impact our
audit, and we were able to obtain information needed to satisfy our audit
objectives and related conclusions.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 31, 2020. As disclosed in
Figure 2 (on the following page), for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we
determined that MDH satisfactorily addressed three of those six findings. The
remaining three findings are repeated in this report.
2 As defined by the Federal Department of Homeland Security Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) did not
establish financial and reporting requirements and did not
Finding 1 Not Repeated
monitor pharmacy services provided through Managed
Care Organizations.
MDH did not perform audits of certain programs’
Repeated
Finding 2 pharmacy claims and did not use available data to identify
(Current Finding 3)
improper claims.
MDH did not have procedures to ensure the pharmacy
vendor obtained the required documentation and properly
Finding 3 Not Repeated
authorized high risk and high cost pharmacy claims for
three of the four programs.
MDH did not have procedures to ensure that prescribing
Repeated
Finding 4 providers were licensed prior to approving pharmacy
(Current Finding 2)
claims for payment.
MDH did not submit certain Maryland AIDS Drug
Assistance Program (MADAP) drug utilization data to two
drug manufacturers resulting in the untimely collection of
Finding 5 Not Repeated
approximately $20.6 million in rebates including $1.6
million that is no longer collectable, and lost investment
income totaling approximately $187,800.
MDH did not ensure that drug manufacturers provided
timely and proper MADAP drug rebate payments and as a Repeated
Finding 6
result did not pursue collection of $7.3 million in (Current Finding 4)
outstanding rebates.
MDH did not obtain adequate assurance that the pharmacy
vendor had sufficient security over its information system
Finding 7 to protect sensitive data such as personally identifiable Status Redacted3
information and protected health information maintained by
the vendor.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1244(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Claims Processing
Finding 1
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not ensure
manually processed Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program (MMPP) claims
were proper, resulting in overpayments of approximately $397,000 related to
11 of the 15 claims we tested.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure manually processed MMPP claims were proper, resulting in
overpayments of approximately $397,000. Pharmacy claims are generally paid
based on rates (known as the allowable drug cost) programmed in the pharmacy
vendor system. However, the allowable costs for certain drugs4 are calculated and
processed manually by an MMPP employee using criteria provided in State
regulations to process the claim. According to MCPA records, during fiscal year
2022 there were approximately 1,400 manual claims totaling $46.8 million
processed in the pharmacy vendor system.
MCPA management advised that it performed a monthly review of manually
processed claims, but could only document that this review was performed for
one month (December 2022) during our audit period. According to MCPA
management, the employee responsible for performing this review left State
employment and it could not locate evidence of reviews performed prior to
December 2022.
Our test of 15 manual claims judgmentally selected based on materiality (that is,
price per pill) totaling $9.6 million and processed between June 2020 and
November 2022 disclosed that 11 claims were overpaid by approximately
$397,000 because the employee who processed the claim entered an amount that
exceeded the allowable drug cost by $1,959 to $170,000. MCPA was not aware
of these overpayments until we brought them to its attention in May 2023. As of
May 2023, MCPA had recovered $289,000 of the overpayments and advised that
it would pursue recovery of the remaining $108,000.
4 According to State regulations, the amount MMPP pays is the lower of the wholesale acquisition
cost or the actual acquisition cost plus eight percent for certain high-cost drugs.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
a. perform independent documented reviews of manually processed claims
including those processed during the audit period; and
b. recover any overpayments identified, including those noted above.
Finding 2
MDH did not have procedures to ensure that prescribing providers were
licensed prior to approving pharmacy claims for payment.
Analysis
MDH did not have procedures to ensure that prescribing providers were
licensed prior to approving pharmacy claims for payment. MDH validated that
providers were licensed by the appropriate Health Professional Board during
the provider enrollment process for each of the four programs.5 However,
pharmacy claims can be paid regardless of whether the prescribing provider
was enrolled in the program (and therefore subject to prior licensure
verification), and in such cases, MDH lacked assurance that the provider was
properly licensed, as required by regulations.
We analyzed pharmacy claims activity during fiscal year 2022 and identified
claims totaling approximately $17.6 million paid to 9,318 prescribing
providers who were not enrolled in the MDH programs, and therefore were not
subject to license validation (see Figure 3 on the following page). Our test of
60 providers with significant paid claims for the respective programs during
fiscal year 2022 (totaling approximately $7 million), disclosed that, although
the prescribing provider was not enrolled in the respective program at the
time of the claim, they were properly licensed.
5 For the MCO pharmacy-related costs, since MDH does not directly administer the program, it is
the responsibility of each MCO to ensure that participating prescribing providers were licensed.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 3
Fiscal Year 2022 Pharmacy Claims and Non-Validated
Prescribers
Total Activity Non-Validated Prescribers
Program
Claims Payments Claims Payments
MMPP 5,073,694 $597,193,372 280,881 $16,947,913
MADAP 100,002 31,461,854 3,469 640,080
KDP 14,553 626,493 513 31,226
BCCDTP 2,270 1,763,151 35 7,095
Totals 5,190,519 $631,044,870 284,898 $17,626,314
Source: MDH records
State regulations for each of the four programs included in Figure 3 require
prescribing providers to be licensed in the State in which they practice. In
addition, federal regulations require that for MMPP, prescribing providers be
enrolled in the Medicaid program. According to federal guidance, ensuring
that prescribing and referring physicians are prescreened and enrolled in
Medicaid helps to reduce fraud and lowers risk to consumers.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its
response to that report, MDH, on behalf of MCPA and PHPA, indicated that
edits in the new pharmacy vendor system would deny claims from providers
who had not enrolled in the respective MDH program. Although the new
pharmacy vendor system went live in October 2022, as of July 2023, these
edits had not been implemented, and as noted above, MDH had not
implemented alternative procedures to ensure prescribing providers are
properly licensed prior to paying claims.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDH establish procedures to ensure that prescribing
providers are licensed as required by program regulations prior to paying
pharmacy claims (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 3
MDH did not audit three of the four fee-for-service programs’ pharmacy
claims, did not analyze claim reversals, and did not use available drug
utilization data to identify improper claims.
Analysis
MDH did not audit three of the four fee-for-service programs’ pharmacy claims,
did not analyze claim reversals, and did not use available drug utilization claims
data to identify improper claims.
MDH Did Not Audit Most of the Participating Pharmacies’ Claims
MDH did not have procedures to audit the majority of its pharmacy activity to
identify policy and billing violations as well as any potential fraud, waste, or
abuse. While 52 pharmacies under MADAP were audited, no audits of MMPP,
BCCDTP, and KDP pharmacies were conducted; which means that only 2 percent
of the 2,585 pharmacies with activity during fiscal year 2022 were audited. We
noted that the MADAP audits, which were conducted by MDH’s pharmacy
vendor and related to calendar year 2020 activity, identified claims totaling
approximately $425,000 that needed to be recovered.
MDH should develop criteria to ensure appropriate audit coverage for these
programs. According to industry best practices, pharmacy claims should be
audited on a routine basis. The primary purpose of these audits is to perform
manual verifications that are not possible through the pharmacy vendor system,
such as to ensure that a valid prescription was issued, was properly filled, or that
the prescription was actually picked up by the recipient.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. MDH’s
response to that report, on behalf of MCPA and PHPA, indicated that MDH
planned to procure a vendor to perform these audits by the end of calendar year
2022. MDH had not procured these services for MMPP, BCCDTP, or KDP and
advised us that it no longer plans to procure the audit services and had not
developed a formal plan to audit the claims.
MDH Did Not Evaluate Pharmacy Claim Reversals
MDH did not evaluate claims data to identify pharmacies that may not be
processing claim reversals when prescriptions are not picked up by the recipient.
Pharmacies are paid by the State based on claims submitted when the
prescriptions are filled, rather than when the prescriptions are picked up. State
regulations require pharmacies to reverse the charges (and reimburse the State)
when the prescriptions are not picked up within 14 days of the claim submission.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our analysis of fiscal year 2022 claims data for the four fee-for-service programs
disclosed that 710 of the 2,585 participating pharmacies had reversal rates under
10 percent, which was in some cases significantly below the respective program
averages (see Figure 4). For example, our review of the 1,413 pharmacies in
MMPP with paid claims totaling $597.2 million disclosed an average reversal rate
of 19 percent. We noted 364 pharmacies had a reversal rate under 10 percent
including 201 pharmacies with $90.3 million in paid claims that had less than 5
percent of their claims reversed. According to the United States Government
Accountability Office, there may be legitimate reasons for a pharmacy to have a
low percentage of claim reversals, however such pharmacies may warrant a
follow-up review.6
Figure 4
OLA Analysis of Pharmacy Reversal Rates
During Fiscal Year 2022
Total Count Average Pharmacies with Reversal
Program of Reversal Rates Under 10 Percent
Pharmacies Rate Count Claims Paid
MMPP 1,413 19% 364 $221,843,456
MADAP 752 22% 182 9,410,226
BCCDTP 221 21% 90 51,318
KDP 199 23% 74 101,809
Total 2,585 - 710 $231,406,809
Source: OLA analysis of MDH records
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, MDH, on behalf of MCPA and PHPA, indicated that it
planned to procure a vendor to identify and investigate pharmacies with low
reversal rates by the end of calendar year 2022. During our current audit, MDH
management advised us that it no longer plans to procure a vendor for these
services and had not developed a formal plan to identify and investigate low
reversal rates.
6 A July 2015 Government Accountability Office report on Medicaid titled ‘Additional Reporting
May Help CMS Oversee Prescription-Drug Fraud Controls’ noted that pharmacies with too few
adjustments may be a red flag for concern.
16

--- Page 19 ---
MDH Did Not Analyze MMPP Claims Data to Identify Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
MDH did not have a comprehensive process to utilize MMPP drug utilization
claims data to identify fraud, waste, and abuse.7 In accordance with federal law,
MDH operates a Drug Utilization Review to reduce clinical abuse and misuse of
outpatient prescription drugs. Although MDH advised that it also utilized drug
utilization claims data to identify patterns of improper activity for further
investigations (such as questionable dispensing or prescribing practices), MDH’s
written procedures at the time of our review did not specify how this data was to
be used and MDH could not document that it analyzed the data for this purpose.
Furthermore, we noted that MDH only conducted two investigations during our
audit period that were initiated based on concerns identified using drug utilization
claims data.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, MDH indicated that it would incorporate the use of drug
utilization claims data to identify potential fraud, waste, and abuse by December
31, 2020. However, as noted above, MDH could not document how this data was
used.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDH,
a. establish procedures to periodically audit each program’s pharmacy
claims on a test basis (repeat);
b. investigate the aforementioned pharmacies with below average reversals
and take appropriate follow-up action (repeat); and
c. utilize all available data to help identify improper MMPP pharmacy
claims including fraud, waste, and abuse (repeat).
Rebates
Background
MDH receives prescription drug rebates under two federal programs, the
Medicaid Drug Rebate program and Section 340B Drug Pricing Program which
establish the specific drugs that are eligible for rebates and the applicable rebate
rates. Rebates are received from drug manufacturers for covered outpatient
drugs dispensed to approved clients under each MDH pharmacy program.
The pharmacy vendor system tracks all drug purchases, referred to as drug
utilization data, for each program by drug manufacturer. On a quarterly basis,
7 We did not review the other three programs for this control given the lesser claims activity (see
Figure 3 on page 12).
17

--- Page 20 ---
MDH sends an invoice for rebates to each drug manufacturer for each of the
four fee-for-service programs and the MCO program based on drug utilization
activity for the period. MDH’s fiscal services handles the invoicing, accounts
receivables, and collections processes for MCO, MMPP, KDP, and BCCDTP
rebates, and the MADAP program is responsible for handling its own rebates.
We reviewed the procedures and performed testing on rebates for these five
programs, and noted the following issues with rebates under the MADAP
program.
Finding 4
MDH did not ensure that drug manufacturers provided timely and proper
MADAP drug rebate payments.
Analysis
MDH did not ensure that drug manufacturers provided timely and proper
MADAP drug rebate payments. Specifically, MDH’s accounts receivable
records were not sufficient to enable MDH to determine the total amount owed
by each manufacturer and the age of the related receivable balances and could
not document its collection efforts for the outstanding rebates. In addition,
MDH did not have a documented process to verify the propriety of rebates
remitted by one drug manufacturer that accounted for $22.1 million (49
percent) of the $45.2 million in MADAP rebates received during fiscal year
2022.
MDH Had Inaccurate Accounting Records and Could Not Document Collection
Efforts
MDH did not maintain accurate accounts receivable records for use in
monitoring MADAP rebates owed by drug manufacturers. Although MDH
established a separate receivable for each amount it invoiced to the drug
manufacturers, it did not always apply payments to the correct receivable.
Consequently, MDH could not readily determine the total amount owed by
each drug manufacturer and the age of the receivables.
MDH also could not document that it pursued collection of outstanding
amounts or referred delinquent accounts to the State’s Central Collections Unit
(CCU). Our analysis of MDH accounts receivable records for calendar years
2021 and 2022 disclosed that as of March 22, 2023, outstanding MADAP
rebates totaled $12.4 million, including at least $1.5 million in rebates that were
outstanding for more than a year. MDH could not provide documentation of its
efforts to collect these outstanding rebates or referral to the CCU of any
amounts that remained delinquent.
18

--- Page 21 ---
An accurate report to age delinquent accounts is required by the Comptroller of
Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual. In addition, State regulations
provide that outstanding accounts which remain uncollected for 90 days be
transferred to CCU for additional collection activity.
MDH Could Not Document That Rebates From One Drug Manufacturer Were
Verified
MDH could not document that it verified the propriety of rebate payments from
one drug manufacturer. According to agency records, MDH invoiced the
manufacturer for rebates totaling $75 million between July 2019 and March
2022. Our review disclosed that the rebates remitted by this manufacturer
during this period totaled only $61.4 million. Although MDH advised that the
manufacturer reduced the amount paid because certain drug costs were not
eligible for rebate, MDH could not document that it had verified that the
reduced payments were properly calculated in accordance with the drug
manufacturer’s agreement. Our review of all rebates for the first quarter of
calendar year 2022 for this drug manufacturer did not disclose any issues with
the manufacturer’s calculation. We noted that MDH had a process in place to
verify the propriety of rebates remitted by the other participating drug
manufacturers.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of procedures to ensure that drug
manufacturers submitted drug rebates timely and accurately were commented
upon in our preceding audit report and our April 2018 audit report of the
Maryland Department of Health – Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration, Office of Population Health Improvement, Office of
Preparedness and Response. MDH’s response to our prior reports indicated
that it would establish procedures to ensure drug manufacturer rebates were
paid accurately and timely, and pursue collection of outstanding amounts by
April 2020. However, as noted above, these procedures were not in place at the
time of our review.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to ensure that all required drug manufacturers
pay rebates accurately and timely (repeat), including the development
of accounts receivable records that provide sufficient information to
monitor outstanding rebates and pursue collection activities; and
b. pursue collections of any outstanding rebates, including those noted
above (repeat).
19

--- Page 22 ---
System Security
We determined that Finding 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with MDH’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) pharmacy services for the period beginning July 1, 2019 and
ending December 31, 2022. The audit focuses on pharmacy services provided by
MDH through five separate programs of which two are in the Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA) and three are in the Prevention and Health
Promotion Administration (PHPA):
MCPA
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
PHPA
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistant Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program
 Kidney Disease Program
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDH’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included MDH’s pharmacy point-of-sale electronic claims
management system (pharmacy vendor system) security and controls, claims
adjudication and processing, manual overrides, rate setting, program monitoring
and audits, and rebate processing. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA by MDH.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, our audit did not
21

--- Page 24 ---
include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance and programs and an assessment of
MDH’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDH.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2019 to December 31, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDH’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
We also extracted data from the Medicaid Management Information System (such
as claim payments) for the purpose of selecting test items and performing data
analytics. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
22

--- Page 25 ---
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDH, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDH that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
23

--- Page 26 ---
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MDH and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of MCPA and PHPA, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH
regarding the results of our review of its response.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of June 2024 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
1 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center
2 State Psychiatric Hospital Centers  Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
 Springfield Hospital Center
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review Commission
3 Health Regulatory Commission 01/25/24
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
Managed Care Program, known as HealthChoice
Medical Care Programs Administration –
4 including oversight of the nine private Managed 12/14/23
Managed Care Program
Care Organizations
5 Medical Care Programs Administration Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/23
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director for
Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
6 Office of the Secretary and Other Units Disabilities 10/19/23
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing
and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
7 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
Developmental Disabilities
8 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Administration
Behavioral Health Administration and  Behavioral Health Administration
Medical Care Programs Administration -  Medical Care Programs Administration
9 10/25/22
Administrative Service Organization for Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services Behavioral Health Services
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
10 10/24/22
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
25

--- Page 28 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of June 2024 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institute for Children and Children and Adolescents
11 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
12 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
 Office of Population Health Improvement
Prevention and Health Promotion
 Office of Preparedness and Response
Administration, Office of Population
 Office of Provider Engagement and
13 Health Improvement, Office of 02/23/21
Regulation – Office of Controlled Substances
Preparedness and Response, and Office of
Administration
Provider Engagement and Regulation
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulation – Prescription Drug Monitoring
Program
 22 Health Professional Boards and
14 Regulatory Services Commissions 01/19/21
 The Office of Health Care Quality
15 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20
26

--- Page 29 ---
APPENDIX
August 8, 2024
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of
Health – Pharmacy Services for the period beginning July 1, 2019 to December 31, 2022.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., M.P.H.
Secretary
Enclosures
cc: Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Marie Grant, Assistant Secretary for Health Policy, MDH
Nilesh Kalyanaraman, M.D., Deputy Secretary, Public Health Services, MDH
Erin S. Penniston, Chief of Staff, Public Health Services, MDH
Ryan B. Moran, Dr. P.H., Deputy Secretary, Health Care Financing & Medicaid Director,
MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Tricia C. Roddy, Deputy Medicaid Director, MDH
Warren Waters, Jr., Chief of Staff, Health Care Financing, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, Internal Controls, Audit
Compliance & Information Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
Agency Response Form
Claims Processing
Finding 1
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not ensure
manually processed Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program (MMPP) claims
were proper, resulting in overpayments of approximately $397,000 related to
11 of the 15 claims we tested.
We recommend that the Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
a. perform independent documented reviews of manually processed claims
including those processed during the audit period; and
b. recover any overpayments identified, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDH has implemented policies and procedures to ensure future
corrective action or manually processed pharmacy claims undergo independent documented
explain disagreement. review to ensure propriety. For the past claims, MMPP has performed a
review of all manually processed claims for each of the 4 fiscal years
and has performed recovery of identified overpayments.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/2024
Please provide details of MMPP has recovered the vast majority of the overpayments identified
corrective action or by its review. The review identified overpayments totaling $451,864.
explain disagreement. MDH successfully recovered $360,326. The remaining overpayments of
$91,538 were to a pharmacy which is no longer in business. The amount
will be referred to the Central Collections Unit to finalize recovery.
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MDH did not have procedures to ensure that prescribing providers were
licensed prior to approving pharmacy claims for payment.
We recommend that MDH establish procedures to ensure that prescribing
providers are licensed as required by program regulations prior to paying
pharmacy claims (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MMPP Response:
corrective action or Maryland Medicaid went live with full implementation of the
explain disagreement. mechanism for POS denial of claims submitted with prescribers that
have not registered with Maryland Medicaid as of July 1, 2024. Now for
all FFS Medicaid pharmacy claims, prescribers must be enrolled with
Maryland Medicaid.
PHPA Response:
MDH has established procedures to determine if prescribing providers
are licensed by having the pharmacy point of sale (POS) vendor utilize
the Maryland Medicaid prescriber file when adjudicating pharmacy
claims.
MDH rolled out a mechanism for POS denial for claims submitted with
prescribers that have not registered with Maryland Medicaid which will
also capture those not licensed so that claims can be denied at POS. This
new system automated MADAP’s review of these claims and essentially
decreased the amount of invalid prescriber claims from being paid at
POS. MADAP is currently working with the PBM to implement a
mechanism to deny pharmacy claims submitted with unlicensed
prescriber credentials after September 1, 2024. Until such time, MADAP
will maintain a weekly review of the invalid prescriber report.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MDH did not audit three of the four fee-for-service programs’ pharmacy
claims, did not analyze claim reversals, and did not use available drug
utilization data to identify improper claims.
We recommend that MDH,
a. establish procedures to periodically audit each program’s pharmacy
claims on a test basis (repeat);
b. investigate the aforementioned pharmacies with below average reversals
and take appropriate follow-up action (repeat); and
c. utilize all available data to help identify improper MMPP pharmacy
claims including fraud, waste, and abuse (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details The OIGH continually reviews pharmacy claims to detect instances of
of corrective action or fraud, waste, and abuse within the Medicaid program utilizing all
explain disagreement. available data. OIGH is recruiting for additional resources to conduct
these reviews. OIGH has developed policies and procedures to audit
each program’s pharmacy claims and will work to have members of its
existing staff conduct these audits while recruitment continues.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2025
Please provide details of OIGH has begun data mining pharmacies that have below average
corrective action or reversal rates. The OIGH will conduct on-site reviews of those
explain disagreement. pharmacies.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The OIGH continually reviews pharmacy claims to detect instances of
corrective action or fraud, waste, and abuse within the Medicaid program utilizing all
explain disagreement. available data. The OIGH continues to run regular data mining
surveillance runs on MMPP data. OIGH also conducts on-site
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
Agency Response Form
investigations of pharmacies that present as outliers in these surveillance
runs or in response to a referral.
Rebates
Finding 4
MDH did not ensure that drug manufacturers provided timely and proper
MADAP drug rebate payments.
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to ensure that all required drug manufacturers
pay rebates accurately and timely (repeat), including the development
of accounts receivable records that provide sufficient information to
monitor outstanding rebates and pursue collection activities; and
b. pursue collections of any outstanding rebates, including those noted
above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDH/MADAP has revised rebate documentation procedures for invoice
corrective action or accuracy, payment accuracy including verification of disputed claims
explain disagreement. resulting in reduced payments, monitoring of outstanding rebates, and
collection activities.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of As of June 2023, MADAP established an account with the Maryland
corrective action or Central Collection Union (CCU) to send delinquent labeler accounts to
explain disagreement. CCU for collection. Also in June 2023, MADAP received the first list of
manufacturers from the PBM which represented 3Q2022 outstanding
balances. MADAP has revised the procedures for pursuing collections of
any outstanding rebates.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
Agency Response Form
System Security
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 5 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including
the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with MDH’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, MDH’s responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 35 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Chau D. Mai
Dorian A. Fournier, CIA
Staff Auditors