Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Global Campus


University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Global Campus (compressed file available for quicker download)
Date: 08/20/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66c4ca34ba25aaae5f5d7dad
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:08:51.111106
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
August 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 20, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) for the
period beginning October 1, 2018 and ending December 31, 2022. UMGC
primarily offers on-line degree and non-credit educational programs to students
who prefer not to enroll in more traditional programs.
This audit report contains a number of significant findings, including millions of
dollars lost because of an abandoned information technology project, related to
entities created by UMGC with the approval of the USM Board of Regents. As
noted in our prior report, UMGC was permitted to create three new independent
business entities, two of which were spinoffs of its information technology unit
and its data analytics unit. The intent was, in part, to help commercialize the
technology, business processes, and intellectual property of UMGC, and by doing
so, expand its revenue sources into new areas and address UMGC’s long-term
challenges in maintaining its position in a changing global marketplace. UMGC
provided $25 million in startup funding to two of these entities. At the time of
our current audit, these entities had been in existence for over six years.
Our audit disclosed that UMGC has not conducted a formal comprehensive
evaluation of these entities’ success in meeting their goals and objectives, and our
review disclosed that two of these entities remained almost solely dependent on
UMGC as a customer and source of revenue. Between fiscal years 2017 and
2022, revenue reported by one of these entities1 totaled $215.3 million, of which
$198.1 million came from UMGC. Despite the significant contributions and
exclusive use of the entities for certain services, UMGC had essentially no
1 As explained elsewhere in this report, this entity served as the holding company of the second
company and reported financial data on a consolidated basis.

--- Page 4 ---
oversight or control and could not provide critical information about operations
including the salaries being paid to its employees, procurement practices, ethics
policies, and internal controls.
In this regard, UMGC relied solely on these entities for its information technology
(IT) services without any competitive procurement to ensure the costs were
reasonable and the entities were qualified to provide the services. Because these
entities were established as High Impact Economic Development Activities
(HIEDA) entities, State law permits UMGC to use them without competitive
procurement. However, the law does not mandate exclusive use of these entities,
and we believe that the findings in this report demonstrate that UMGC’s practice
of doing so, including services that were subcontracted out to other vendors,
severely restricted its ability to ensure that it obtains IT services from the best
qualified vendor and in the most cost-effective manner.
UMGC also did not adequately monitor the work performed by these entities to
ensure the related services were provided. The lack of competitive procurement
and inadequate monitoring may have contributed, at least in part, to a failed IT
project procured from one of these entities for implementation of a new student
information system on which UMGC had expended $25.7 million without the
delivery of a viable product. UMGC abandoned the project prior to completion
after an independent vendor noted multiple implementation deficiencies and
significant risk to UMGC if an attempt was made to go live on the scheduled start
date. Consequently, the $25.7 million, which exceeded the initial expected cost of
$21.6 million, was lost, and UMGC ultimately paid another vendor $719,000 to
update its existing student information system. This update did not provide the
functionality originally anticipated with the new student information system, but
was necessary to ensure the continued orderly processing of financial aid.
We also found that invoices received for other IT services requested from the
entities did not provide sufficient information for UMGC to adequately monitor
costs being incurred and services received, and that there was a lack of
accountability over $11.3 million of contingency fees paid between fiscal year
2020 and 2023.
Our audit further disclosed that UMGC did not have formal documented
procedures for assigning work under two master advertising contracts totaling
$500 million, and related statements of work were not sufficiently detailed to
allow for effective monitoring by UMGC. Furthermore, UMGC did not
adequately justify two sole source procurements of certain other advertising
services and did not consolidate those procurements which we believe
circumvented USM Procurement Policies and Procedures. The failure to
2

--- Page 5 ---
properly procure and monitor work on these contracts is significant given the
ongoing drop in enrollment during the audit period.
We also found that UMGC did not adequately control and account for certain
collections, which totaled $7.3 million in fiscal year 2022, and did not
independently review and approve the majority of changes in student residency
status.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that UMGC satisfactorily
addressed these four findings.
The USM Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of UMGC, is included as an
appendix to this report. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the
response and, while UMGC generally agrees with the recommendations in this
report, we identified certain instances in which statements in the response conflict
with or disagree with the report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and
reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included “auditor’s comments” within USM’s response to explain our position.
Furthermore, there are other aspects of USM’s response which will require further
clarification, but we do not anticipate that these will require the Committee’s
attention to resolve. In accordance with our policy, we have edited USM’s
response as well as Exhibit 1 to remove vendor names or products.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
UMGC. We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and UMGC’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) Business Initiatives
Finding 1 – We identified certain activities that raise questions as to 13
whether UMGC’s continued relationship with Ventures and its
affiliates is in the best interest of UMGC and the State, including
being the primary revenue source for Ventures and AccelerEd.
Finding 2 – UMGC obtained information technology (IT) services from 15
Ventures and its subsidiaries totaling approximately $184.1 million
during November 2018 to December 2022 without competitive
procurement and without verifying that the amounts paid were
proper.
Finding 3 – UMGC did not adequately monitor an IT project being 17
developed for its use by Ventures, which was ultimately determined
to be unusable and abandoned after UMGC expended $25.7 million.
Advertising Contracts
Finding 4 – UMGC did not have formal documented procedures for 21
assigning work to pre-qualified vendors for two master advertising
contracts totaling $500 million, and related statements of work were
not sufficiently detailed to allow for effective monitoring by
UMGC.
Finding 5 – UMGC did not adequately justify two sole source 22
procurements of advertising services and did not consolidate the
procurements which we believe circumvented University System of
Maryland Procurement Policies and Procedures.
Cash Receipts
Finding 6 – UMGC did not adequately control and account for 23
collections, which totaled $7.3 million in fiscal year 2022.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Student Residency Status
Finding 7 – UMGC’s procedures for reviewing residency changes were 25
not sufficiently comprehensive, resulting in 67 percent of residency
changes not being subject to an independent review and approval.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 27
Exhibit 1 – UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor 30
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC)2 is a public institution of
the University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of
the USM’s Board of Regents. UMGC offers degree and non-credit educational
programs to students who prefer not to enroll in more traditional programs.
UMGC strives to broaden educational opportunities through online education; the
majority of UMGC’s courses are taught online.
UMGC consists of three major divisions: the Statewide Division, the Asian
Division, and the European Division. These three divisions offer educational
programs at a number of locations primarily throughout the State of Maryland, as
well as in numerous foreign countries. UMGC maintains a residential conference
center that includes conference rooms, guest accommodations, and dining
facilities. UMGC’s main administrative office and residential conference center
are located in Adelphi, Maryland. The Asian Division is headquartered in Tokyo,
Japan and the European Division is headquartered in Kaiserslautern, Germany.
For fiscal year 2022, UMGC’s enrollment totaled 86,582 students. UMGC’s
budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and student fees; a State
general fund appropriation; and restricted revenues, such as federal grants.
According to UMGC’s records, fiscal year 2022 revenues totaled approximately
$498.7 million, which included a State general fund appropriation of
approximately $41 million (see Figure 1 on the following page).
2 Prior to July 1, 2019, UMGC was named University of Maryland University College (UMUC).
Effective that date, the name was changed to University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC).
The current name has been used in this report regardless of the time period referenced.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
UMGC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 1,212 94%
Vacant 84 6%
Total 1,296
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $243,760,267 48.9%
Technical and Special Fees 2,686,360 0.5%
Operating Expenses 252,297,308 50.6%
Total $498,743,935
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $ 41,060,489 8.2%
Tuition and Fees 351,270,518 70.4%
Other University Revenues3 21,661,202 4.4%
$413,992,209 83.0%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts $ 81,646,178 16.4%
Other Gifts, Grants and Contracts 3,105,548 .6%
84,751,726 17.0%
Total $498,743,935
Source: State financial records and UMGC personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 6, 2019. We determined that
UMGC satisfactorily addressed these four findings.
3 Includes revenues from Educational Activities ($12.6M) and from the Higher Education
Investment Fund ($4.6M).
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) Business
Initiatives
Background and Limitation of OLA Work
Our preceding audit report commented that, in February 2015, the University
System of Maryland (USM) Board of Regents (BOR) approved the framework for
a new business model for UMGC aimed at addressing its long-term challenges in
maintaining its position in a changing global marketplace. Under this new model,
UMGC remains within USM, but was granted certain autonomies and exemptions
from USM and State laws, rules, and procedures, and strengthened protections of
UMGC’s proprietary and competitive information.
In our preceding report we disclosed that UMGC established certain business
entities consistent with this new business model, two of which were designated as
High Impact Economic Development Activities (HIEDA). HIEDA entities are
initiatives which, according to State law, may be established by designated
institutions of higher education, including USM, to promote the economic
interests of the State in areas such as job creation and workforce development,
technology transfer, commercialization, and entrepreneurship. In September
2015, the USM BOR approved its Policy On High Impact Economic Development
Activities (Policy) addressing, in part, the purpose, creation, requirements,
conflicts of interest, and procurement policies and procedures relating to HIEDA
entities for USM institutions. Proposals for establishing a HIEDA entity must be
presented to the USM Chancellor to obtain certification as meeting required
criteria. Employees of these business entities, including any former UMGC
employees who transferred to these HIEDA entities, are not State employees.
 In September 2015, the BOR approved the creation of HelioCampus,
UMGC’s first HIEDA entity, which was a spin-off of its Office of
Analytics. UMGC provided $10 million of its funds as startup funding to
HelioCampus. Furthermore, UMGC’s Vice President for Data Analytics
and 15 other UMGC employees transferred to the new entity.
HelioCampus was created to provide services, such as data analytics and
data-sharing platforms, to assist universities, including UMGC, with
increasing enrollment, improving student success, and ensuring financial
stability.
 In June 2016, the BOR approved the creation of a second HIEDA entity,
UMGC Ventures (Ventures), as a tax-exempt holding company for
businesses commercialized by UMGC. According to Ventures’ Articles
9

--- Page 12 ---
of Incorporation and the USM HIEDA certification, the president of
UMGC appoints the chairperson and the majority of Ventures’ board of
directors. UMGC transferred $15 million of its funds to Ventures for
startup funding. In September 2016, UMGC transferred its ownership in
HelioCampus to Ventures.
 In June 2017, the BOR approved UMGC’s spin-off of its Office of
Technology (including 100 employees) into a subsidiary company within
Ventures. The subsidiary company, AccelerEd, offers professional
information technology (IT) services for a fee to educational institutions,
including UMGC. UMGC did not provide any start-up funding for
AccelerEd, which initially was not classified as a HIEDA entity, but was
subsequently approved by the USM Chancellor as a HIEDA entity in June
2019.
 In December 2019, a controlling interest in HelioCampus was sold by
Ventures to a private equity firm. According to the fiscal year 2020
audited financial statements for Ventures and its subsidiaries, proceeds
from the sale totaled approximately $26.2 million, and subsequent to the
sale Ventures retained a 21.1 percent interest in HelioCampus4 with a fair
market value at June 30, 2020 of $10 million.
 In January 2021, the University System of Maryland Office of Internal
Audit issued an audit report on UMGC contracts with Ventures. The audit
was recommended by the University System of Maryland’s Independent
Auditor and approved by the BOR Audit Committee. The audit objective
was to determine whether UMGC monitors the expenses incurred and
verifies cost allocations by Ventures in executing services under two
contracts. The audit report concluded that UMGC had adequate controls
to monitor its contract expenses with Ventures and that Ventures is
appropriately allocating its costs. No areas of improvement were
identified.
According to Ventures’ fiscal year 2022 audited financial statements, the purpose
of Ventures was to commercialize the technology, business process, and
intellectual property of UMGC, increase enrollment revenues through corporate
partnerships, expand revenues into new areas to support UMGC, and build an
endowment for UMGC’s benefit to reduce the cost of higher education for
Maryland residents. To meet these objectives, HelioCampus and AccelerEd
originally were placed under Ventures with the expectation of marketing and
4 UMGC’s 21.1 percent remaining interest is actually in a holding company established by the
private equity firm.
10

--- Page 13 ---
providing data analytics and IT services for a fee to institutions of higher
education and potentially other clients.
During our current audit of UMGC we attempted to review certain activity
relating to Ventures, AccelerEd, and HelioCampus, including services provided to
UMGC, as well as oversight of these entities exercised by UMGC. However, in
response to several of our requests for information and documentation relating to
these entities, UMGC stated that it was unable to meet our requests for one or
more of these entities, frequently answering “N/A” (not applicable) or “Out of
scope, not related to UMGC.” For example, UMGC would not provide
information or documentation we requested and deemed significant for the
purposes of our audit in determining the relationship between the entities and
UMGC and the extent of our audit effort regarding:
 the existence of entity governing boards, as well as members, terms,
vacancies, meetings, and powers;
 title, salary, bonus, and severance information for all entity employees;
 the existence of ethics and procurement policies established by the
entities;
 agreements and contracts established between the entities and between the
entities and any subcontractors; and
 details regarding the aforementioned sale of HelioCampus
UMGC referred us to Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 990 Return of
Organization Exempt From Income Tax for certain information, which we
examined as indicated below. UMGC further advised us that, because of IRS
regulations regarding the tax-exempt status granted to Ventures, that entity,
including its subsidiaries AccelerEd and HelioCampus, must remain at arm’s
length and not be subject to any direct control from UMGC, and consequently,
UMGC declined to provide the requested information or documentation. As an
aside, and as previously mentioned, the UMGC President appoints the majority of
the Ventures’ board.
The UMGC decision to not provide us with requested information limited our
ability to review the relationship between the various entities. Furthermore, the
IRS regulation UMGC has referenced appears to have severely restricted
UMGC’s ability to monitor and respond to critical activity relating to these
entities as evidenced by the related findings in this report, including a finding that
during fiscal years 2017 to 2022 UMGC accounted for between 91 and 99 percent
of Ventures’ business activity, which was awarded by UMGC as essentially a sole
source procurement.
11

--- Page 14 ---
In our opinion, the extent of exclusive work performed for UMGC by Ventures
and its subsidiaries calls into question the claimed independence of the various
entities; and as previously mentioned the UMGC President appoints the majority
of the Ventures’ board. Furthermore, the UMGC Chief Operating Officer
currently serves on Ventures’ Board. UMGC did provide us with documentation
and answers for other requests and inquires we made which it felt it was permitted
to provide.
Since we could not obtain all requested information about Ventures and its
subsidiaries from UMGC, we reviewed the publicly available IRS Form 990 filed
annually for Ventures which provided certain financial data and other
organizational information we deemed pertinent to our review (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
Financial Data UMGC Ventures, Inc.
Fiscal year 2022 2021 2020 2019
Total Revenue (1) $43.4 million $47.7 million $84.3 million $44.8 million
Total Expenses (2) $39.8 million $44.2 million $63.7 million $36.0 million
Total Number of
205 247 225 134
Employees
Total salaries, other
compensation, and $23.7 million $22.1 million $25.8 million $16.9 million
employee benefits
Reportable compensation
for key employees/ $2.6 million $2.6 million $2.4 million $2.3 million
number of employees 12 12 14 10
receiving (3)
Bonuses and other
incentive compensation/ $260,000 $306,917 $40,000 $247,803
number of employees 7 4 1 6
receiving (4)
Reportable compensation
to board members/ number $245,000 $905,000 $960,000 $960,000
of board members 5 10 11 11
receiving (5)
Source – UMGC Ventures, Inc. (including AccelerEd and HelioCampus) IRS Form 990
(1) Fiscal year 2020 revenue reflects sale of HelioCampus
(2) Fiscal year 2020 expenses reflect $16 million dollar donation to USM Foundation
(3) Reportable on W-2 or 1099 IRS forms
(4) Individual employee bonuses and incentive compensation ranged between $7,380 and $120,000
(5) Individual Board member compensation for the year ranged between $20,000 and $105,000, and Board members’ average
weekly hours ranged between 5 and 12 according to Form 990. In fiscal year 2022, there were a total of seven board members,
including two uncompensated members.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 1
We identified certain activities that raise questions as to whether UMGC’s
continued relationship with Ventures and its affiliates is in the best interest of
UMGC and the State, including being the primary revenue source for
Ventures and AccelerEd.
Analysis
UMGC has not conducted a formal comprehensive and documented evaluation,
including a detailed cost benefit analysis, of whether UMGC Ventures,
AccelerEd, and HelioCampus are meeting their intended purpose, goals, and
objectives, in the most effective manner. At the time of our review, more than six
years had passed since creation of these three entities by the BOR. Our review
disclosed certain conditions that raise questions about whether UMGC’s
continued use of the entities are in the best interest of the State.
 UMGC has been the source for almost all of AccelerEd’s revenue since its
creation in 2017. According to Ventures’ audited financial statements for
fiscal years 2017 to 2022, between 91 and 99 percent of Ventures’
consolidated revenue for those years came from UMGC, the vast majority of
which was for information technology services provided to UMGC by
Ventures’ subsidiary AccelerEd. According to its audited financial
statements, Ventures’ revenue during fiscal years 2017 to 2022 totaled $215.3
million of which UMGC paid $198.1 million for services from AccelerEd.
Although established in 2016 (Ventures) and 2017 (AccelerEd) with
expectations of marketing and providing services to other institutions for a
fee, we concluded from the above financial information that Ventures and
AccelerEd remain solely dependent on UMGC for their continued existence,
given that almost all their revenue is obtained from UMGC operations.
 UMGC could not explain critical aspects of Ventures’ sale of a controlling
interest in HelioCampus in December 2019. Despite our request, UMGC
management could not explain the basis for the sale, how the buyer and sales
price were identified, whether there were other potential buyers, or the basis
for distribution of the sales proceeds ($26.3 million).5 Although UMGC
created HelioCampus and provided $10 million in start-up funding as its sole
investor, UMGC management advised us that they were “not privy to specific
documents related to the valuation and/or sale”.
5 $16 million donated to USM Foundation for UMGC purposes; the remainder retained by
Ventures.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 Ventures made a $1.1 million capital contribution to HelioCampus after the
sale of the controlling interest that was not subject to review and approval by
UMGC. The ownership interest in HelioCampus retained by Ventures after
the sale (21.1 percent) had a fair value of $10 million at June 30, 2020
according to Ventures’ fiscal year 2020 audited financial statements. In July
2020, Ventures elected to make an additional $1.1 million capital contribution
which, due to the issuance of additional ownership shares, was necessary to
maintain its same ownership percentage at that time. Despite the significance
of this decision, it was not subject to review and approval by UMGC.
Furthermore, as of June 30, 2022, the fair value of Ventures’ interest had
declined to $7.1 million due to losses incurred by the company.
Considering the elapsed time and critical activity that has occurred since these
entities were first established by the BOR; the $25 million in start-up funding
provided by UMGC; Ventures’ (and its subsidiaries) almost sole reliance on
UMGC for business, coupled with UMGC’s lack of oversight of Ventures’
operations; as well as the other findings regarding these initiatives we have
included in this report, we believe that the current relationship might not be in the
best financial or operational interest of the State, USM or UMGC.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMGC, in conjunction with USM,
a. conduct periodic formal, documented, comprehensive evaluations,
including a cost benefit analysis, to determine the extent to which the
intended purpose, objectives, and goals of creating UMGC Ventures,
AccelerEd, and HelioCampus, and placing AccelerEd and HelioCampus
within Ventures have been achieved;
b. review the aforementioned Ventures’ activity to ensure that the related
funds were used as intended;
c. determine if any adjustment to its relationship with and continued use of
these entities is warranted, for example whether any services should be
brought back in-house; and
d. update the USM BOR on the results of the evaluations and any resulting
adjustments.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 2
UMGC obtained information technology (IT) services from Ventures and its
subsidiaries totaling approximately $184.1 million during November 2018 to
December 2022 without competitive procurement and without verifying that
the amounts paid were proper.
Analysis
UMGC obtained information technology (IT) services from Ventures and its
subsidiaries totaling approximately $184.1 million during November 2018 to
December 2022 without using a competitive procurement process and without any
verification that the amounts paid were proper. Contrary to its assertions that
Ventures is an independent entity beyond UMGC oversight or control, UMGC
advised us that, because Ventures is a supporting organization to UMGC it has
outsourced all its IT functions to Ventures without considering any other vendors
for the work. Consequently, we concluded that effectively UMGC has utilized a
sole source procurement method, and without adequate justification beyond its
claim that Ventures is a supporting organization. State law and USM policy do
not require (but also do not expressly prohibit) an institution to use a competitive
procurement process when acquiring services normally provided by a HIEDA
entity established by the institution, such as Ventures. However, competitive
procurement is a generally accepted best practice for significant purchases and
helps to ensure that the most capable vendor is obtained at a competitive cost (that
is “best value” is obtained for State funds spent).
 UMGC did not attempt to competitively procure IT services, and instead
depended solely on Ventures to, according to UMGC, ensure that the best
qualified and most advantageous vendor was obtained for required IT tasks.
Furthermore, UMGC, citing the aforementioned IRS regulations, would not
provide us with procurement policies and procedures, if any, used by Ventures
or AccelerEd to ensure their own use of the most advantageous vendor and
subcontractors. This lack of involvement in the procurement and
vendor/subcontractor selection process may have contributed, at least in part,
to UMGC’s loss of millions of dollars from a failed AccelerEd subcontract
discussed in Finding 3.
We did find that written agreements between UMGC and Ventures required
Ventures to use AccelerEd for UMGC’s IT needs rather than permit a
competitive procurement process. Meaning, UMGC was dictating the use of
AccelerEd for its work regardless of capabilities or cost. In July 2019,
UMGC entered into a Master Professional Services Agreement with Ventures
to use AccelerEd for managed professional services based on individual
statements of work (SOWs). The first SOW (SOW 1) required AccelerEd to
15

--- Page 18 ---
provide comprehensive IT services to support UMGC operations at an annual
fixed price, which in the aggregate totaled $142 million for fiscal years 2020
to 2023. As of December 31, 2022, UMGC had also paid Ventures $28.6
million for six additional SOWs for certain other IT services and projects, four
of which were to be provided by AccelerEd and a specifically named third
party subcontractor. UMGC’s Professional Services Agreement with
Ventures expired in June 2023, but was extended for one year, including an
extension of SOW 1 at a cost of $38.4 million.
 Invoices received from Ventures for IT services did not include a breakdown
of costs incurred and services provided for the period, restricting UMGC’s
ability to monitor those costs and services which it received from Ventures.
For example, for SOW 1 UMGC was simply billed each quarter for 25 percent
of the total fixed price for the applicable year. In our opinion, the use of a
fixed price contract, under a no-bid contractual arrangement does not mean
that there is no need for related invoices to provide a level of information and
data regarding what services were provided for the period and the applicable
costs. Such information would be useful in determining the future
continuance of this arrangement, appropriate costs, and the practicality or
potential value to UMGC of obtaining future services under a competitive bid
process. Furthermore, UMGC did not obtain written estimates for additional
IT services as required by the Master Professional Services Agreement.
 UMGC did not verify the propriety of contingency fees charged by
AccelerEd. The fixed price for each year of SOW 1 with AccelerEd included
a contingency fee of 10 percent of total costs, which totaled $11.3 million
between fiscal years 2020 and 2023. UMGC advised that the fee was for
unexpected business activity. In response to our inquiries about the necessity
of the fee and whether unused fees had been refunded, UMGC refused to
provide any information or documentation other than to say that the
agreement was fixed price (in other words the fee was billed and paid yearly).
We question whether a yearly contingency fee, which ranged between $2.9
million and $3.1 million during the aforementioned period, should be
automatically included in each year’s fixed price without a specific
determination of actual need and use.
In June 2022, an independent vendor was contracted by Ventures to conduct a fair
market value assessment of services provided by AccelerEd to UMGC based on
publicly available data. The vendor reported that UMGC’s cost for IT services is
within fair market value range when compared to other predominantly online
institutions. However, this conclusion does not ensure that UMGC is receiving IT
services in the most cost-effective manner. Furthermore, the report identified
16

--- Page 19 ---
numerous key components of SOWs and contracts between institutions and
information technology service providers that were not included or included only
on a limited basis in UMGC’s agreement with Ventures for AccelerEd work, such
as receiving credit for any instance of non-performance and a clear definition of
services included in the scope.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMGC
a. take steps to ensure IT services are procured on a competitive basis;
b. adjust its Professional Services Agreement to require Ventures to provide
documentation of the steps it takes to find the best qualified and most
advantageous vendors for each SOW;
c. ensure that invoices include a breakdown of services provided and costs
incurred for the period;
d. discontinue the use of contingency fees without a clear definition of
permitted usage, a requirement to report usage, and clarification as to the
disposition of unused fees; and
e. include the key components identified by the aforementioned vendor’s
report in future SOWs.
Finding 3
UMGC did not adequately monitor an IT project being developed for its use
by Ventures, which was ultimately determined to be unusable and
abandoned after UMGC expended $25.7 million.
Analysis
UMGC did not adequately monitor an IT project intended to establish a new
student information system (SIS) for UMGC’s use, which was ultimately
determined to be unusable and abandoned after $25.7 million was paid to
Ventures by UMGC. In July 2018, UMGC contracted with AccelerEd (under its
Professional Services Agreement with Ventures) to replace its current SIS at an
expected cost of $19 million plus licensing costs, which were later determined to
be $2.6 million for a total cost of $21.6 million. AccelerEd subcontracted the
work on the project to a third party. The initial go-live target date for the project
was January 2020, and UMGC received periodic status reports from AccelerEd
which addressed, for example, status of completion and projected timelines.
Although the initial go-live date had to be extended several times, status reports
from AccelerEd did not reflect concerns that successful completion of the project
was in question.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The project was stopped and cancelled in June of 2021 after an independent
vendor prepared a report6 for UMGC and Ventures outlining significant
deficiencies with the current status and direction of the project. At that point,
project costs had reached $25.7 million. Even though the independent vendor’s
findings identified numerous significant project oversight and management issues
related to Ventures and its affiliate, that in our opinion directly contributed to the
project failure, UMGC did not pursue or attempt to obtain a refund or liquidated
damages from Ventures or its subcontractor. According to UMGC, no part or
function of that system was implemented. UMGC advised us that it subsequently
used its existing SIS vendor to update its SIS at a cost of $719,000, a step that did
not provide the functionality anticipated under the abandoned system, but was
necessary to ensure the continued orderly processing of student financial aid.
We also found that UMGC did not require periodic independent reviews of the
project. In an April 2021 status report from AccelerEd, a go-live date of
November 1, 2021 was proposed. At that time, an independent vendor was hired
by Ventures to determine the current status of the project and whether a go-live
date of November 1, 2021 was achievable. As noted in Figure 3 on the following
page, the vendor identified significant issues with the project. Specifically, eight
of nine project areas it examined were not ready to go live without significant
risk. The report stated that “going-live would also present significant,
operational, financial and regulatory risk to UMGC”. As further described in
Exhibit 1, the report also expressed concerns regarding basic project governance
exercised by Ventures on UMGC’s behalf and advised that the current structure
had prevented any real oversight by UMGC, and that a restructuring would be
required so that UMGC would have ownership of the project, guide it, and have
accountability for its success.
6 Approval was obtained from UMGC to include Exhibit 1 in our public report.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 3*
Excerpt from Independent Vendor Report on UMGC IT
* In accordance with our policy, we have edited the independent vendor’s report shown in
figure 3 to remove vendor names, logos, products, and other identifying information.
Source: Agency records
UMGC’s agreement with Ventures does not provide for liquidated damages, and
we were unable to determine if agreements between Ventures and AccelerEd or
AccelerEd and its subcontractor provided for damages since, as previously noted,
UMGC would not provide us with any agreements or contracts between those
parties citing IRS regulations relating to Ventures’ tax-exempt status. Absent any
provision for liquidated damages, it appears that no portion of the $25.7 million
expended will be recovered by UMGC (or USM).
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMGC
a. ensure that contracted services are routinely, adequately, and
independently monitored and evaluated to help ensure the proper and
timely receipt of all required deliverables;
b. ensure that a provision for liquidated damages for non-performance is
included in its contracts; and
19

--- Page 22 ---
c. consult with legal counsel regarding the potential for collecting liquidated
damages relating to the closed SIS project noted in this finding.
Advertising Contracts
Background
In January 2019, UMGC competitively procured two advertising master contracts
totaling $500 million, each with a six-year term, as part of a public relations
campaign to increase out-of-state enrollment. The contracts had a total of nine
vendors (four on one contract and five on the other) that met specific technical
qualifications to provide various on-line and off-line marketing services. This
resulted in a pool of pre-qualified vendors with differing cost structures and rates
from which UMGC could obtain advertising services as needed. According to
UMGC, these contracts were part of a marketing campaign to increase enrollment
from outside of the Maryland; Washington, DC; and Virginia region. UMGC
paid $175.4 million related to these contracts between February 2019 and
December 2022. According to UMGC’s records, and as indicated in Figure 4,
UMGC’s total student enrollment decreased and non-Maryland student
enrollment fluctuated relatively little between fiscal years 2019 and 2022.
Furthermore, the Department of Legislatives Services’ analysis of UMGC’s fiscal
year 2023 operating budget addressed this national marketing campaign and noted
that in the first year of the program Philadelphia was selected as a test market
upon which $18 million was expended, but only 212 students were added. The
analysis further noted that after “these lackluster results”, UMGC reduced
national spending and reviewed alternatives to meet enrollment growth goals.
Figure 4
Enrollment Fiscal Years 2019 to 2022
Fiscal Year Fiscal Fiscal Fiscal
2019 Year 2020 Year 2021 Year 2022
Maryland
Resident 35,812 34,094 34,204 32,234
Non-Maryland
Resident 55,573 56,567 55,700 54,348
Totals 91,385 90,661 89,904 86,582
Source: UMGC records
20

--- Page 23 ---
In addition, UMGC annually procured certain other digital and radio focused
advertising services from a separate vendor. During fiscal years 2020 through
2023 the value of the annual sole source contracts with the vendor totaled $3.1
million (the individual annual contracts were valued at $475,000 for digital
services and $300,000 for radio advertising).
Finding 4
UMGC did not have formal documented procedures for assigning work to
pre-qualified vendors for two master advertising contracts totaling $500
million, and related statements of work were not sufficiently detailed to allow
for effective monitoring by UMGC.
Analysis
UMGC did not have formal documented procedures for selecting vendors from
the contracted lists to perform specific advertising services it wanted, such as the
basis for selection and required documentation supporting the selection. In
addition, a competitive procurement process within the prequalified vendors was
not used. Although UMGC was initially going to request proposals for individual
task orders from all eligible vendors, it subsequently removed that wording from
the contracts, and now issues a statement of work (SOW) only to a selected
vendor without obtaining proposals from all eligible vendors. We were advised
by UMGC management that although the selection process is not documented,
authorized employees made selections based on the vendors’ initial technical
proposals and a determination as to which vendor would be best suited for the
specific service. However, this selection process did not document or ensure that
the most cost-effective selection had been made for each task.
Furthermore, SOWs lacked a comprehensive description of the work to be
performed, which precluded effective monitoring. Specifically, the SOWs
required the selected vendor to provide strategy, planning, and purchasing of
advertising in certain specified markets, but did not include the specific services
or deliverables to be performed, such as the number of commercials to be aired,
specific time frames, or specific media outlets. UMGC’s SOWs also did not
include performance measures to enable it to determine how successful the
advertising services provided by the contractors were in increasing enrollment.
UMGC advised us that these specifics are discussed with the vendor verbally, but
without a formal record there is no basis to hold the vendor accountable and to
ensure that all services and deliverables were received, as well as verify the level
of success realized by the contracts. UMGC did advise us that vendors submitted
weekly reports to aid UMGC in their monitoring of the vendor, but we noted that
only one vendor’s SOWs required these weekly reports.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMGC
a. establish formal procedures for selecting and assigning work to
prequalified vendors, such as the basis for selection and required
documentation supporting the selection;
b. use competitive procurement within prequalified vendors for individual
tasks;
c. ensure that task orders or SOWs contain sufficient details to enable
effective monitoring and receipt of requested services and deliverables;
and
d. establish performance measures, such as impact on enrollment, when
establishing SOWs to help direct future use of the contracts.
Finding 5
UMGC did not adequately justify two sole source procurements of
advertising services and did not consolidate the procurements which we
believe circumvented University System of Maryland (USM) Procurement
Policies and Procedures.
Analysis
UMGC did not adequately justify annual sole source procurements of two
advertising contracts with the same vendor7, one for digital marketing services
and another for radio advertising services, and did not consolidate the annual
contracts for each service, which we believe circumvented USM approval
requirements for these services. During fiscal years 2020 through 2023, UMGC
repeatedly entered into annual sole source contracts with the vendor for $475,000
and $300,000. UMGC used similar justifications for both contracts each year and
noted that UMGC could contract with other advertising vendors, but that this
vendor was the only source with the level of market coverage and ability to reach
military veterans and service members that UMGC wanted. However, our
cursory search identified at least one other vendor, which stated it was able to
provide similar services. UMGC’s sole source justifications also inferred that
price was a consideration, even though price is not to be considered a factor in
justifying a sole source procurement. Furthermore, as noted in Finding 4, UMGC
already had significant marketing contracts with other vendors valued at $500
million. UMGC advised that this additional vendor has a strong knowledge of the
military market and was being used to develop military base-specific support;
7 These contracts with this vendor were selected for review based on the material amount paid by
UMGC for these contracts and the repeated use of this vendor and the same contracts from year
to year.
22

--- Page 25 ---
however, this determination was not documented nor a factor included in the
formal sole source justification.
UMGC’s use of annual contracts for each service year, rather than multi-year
contracts appeared to circumvent certain USM and BPW approval requirements.
Specifically, USM’s Procurement Policies and Procedures require approval from
the USM Vice Chancellor of Administration and Finance for sole source
procurements over $500,000 and BPW approval is required for contracts that
exceed $1 million.
During the four-year period, the digital marketing services and the radio
advertising services contracts totaled $1.9 million and $1.2 million, respectively,
and therefore would have required the approval of the USM Vice Chancellor and
BPW if they were procured as multi-year contracts.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMGC comply with USM Procurement Policies and
Procedures regarding sole source procurements. Specifically, we recommend
that UMGC
a. ensure that the sole source procurement method is used only when a
single vendor can meet the contract requirements, and adequately
document the sole source justification; and
b. consolidate sole source procurements for the same services and obtain
required approvals when total procurement amounts exceed established
limits.
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
UMGC did not adequately control and account for collections, which totaled
$7.3 million in fiscal year 2022.
UMGC did not adequately control and account for collections received in the
mail, which, according to State records, totaled approximately $7.3 million during
fiscal year 2022. Collections generally consisted of payments toward tuition.
 Checks received by mail were not always recorded in the check log to
establish accountability over the funds. We selected 10 days8 of collections
8 We selected days, primarily from fiscal year 2022, that included the receipt of material checks
from the check log and matched each day’s recorded collections to the deposits for the respective
days.
23

--- Page 26 ---
totaling approximately $1.2 million from the check log and noted that the
amount deposited for those days totaled approximately $2 million which
exceeded the amount recorded in the log by $800,000. We determined and
UMGC management subsequently confirmed, that the $800,000 difference
was due to certain deposited checks not being recorded in the log as required.
A complete and accurate initial recording of checks is critical for
accountability and to help ensure that all checks received were subsequently
deposited.
 UMGC’s deposit verification procedures were not sufficient to ensure that all
checks received were properly deposited, because the aforementioned check
log was not used in this process, and the employee who performed the
verification also deposited the checks. Specifically, the employee who
performed the deposit verification did not compare the validated deposit
documentation received from the bank to the initial source documents (check
log). Rather, the bank deposit documentation was compared to a summary of
receipts prepared from checks received after their recording in the check log
and prior to entry into UMGC’s financial system. Comparison to the initial
source documents is necessary to ensure that all checks received were
deposited. Furthermore, the employee who made this comparison also
remotely deposited the checks, and therefore was not sufficiently independent
of the process.
Because of the aforementioned conditions, errors or other discrepancies could
occur without timely detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires the initial recordation of checks immediately upon
receipt, and that receipts recorded on initial source documents be traced to deposit
by an employee independent of the cash receipts function.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMGC
a. record all checks received in the mail immediately upon receipt, and
b. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions using initial recordation
documents.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Student Residency Status
Finding 7
UMGC’s procedures for reviewing residency changes were not sufficiently
comprehensive, resulting in 67 percent of residency changes not being
subject to independent review and approval.
Analysis
The majority of UMGC’s residency changes were not subject to any independent
review and approval. For tuition purposes, UMGC students are classified as an
in-state resident, an out-of-state resident, or as military. Although UMGC used
output reports to verify the propriety of residency classifications and changes, not
all changes were subject to review and approval. For example, a change to in-
state status was included on the output reports only if the change was made during
the fall semester of the academic year, and no changes to in-state or military
status impacting a previous semester were included on the reports. Such
retroactive changes can occur when a student subsequently submits
documentation to show that they were in the military or a Maryland resident for a
previous semester and their tuition charges are updated accordingly. According to
UMGC records, 25,609 of the 38,454 changes (67 percent) occurring between
October 2018 and December 2022 were a retroactive or spring semester change
and not subject to UMGC’s output review process. Our testing of five residency
changes not subject to independent review and approval did not disclose any
improper changes.
Ensuring that students are assigned the correct residency status has a financial
implication to UMGC since tuition costs charged to a student can vary greatly
depending on the assigned status. For example, the undergraduate tuition rate for
students with military status was $250 for each credit taken during the fall 2022
term, whereas the undergraduate tuition rate for students with in-state status was
$312 for each credit and out-of-state status was $499 for each credit.
According to its records, during fiscal year 2022, UMGC’s tuition revenue totaled
$352.9 million, of which $59.6 million was for students with military status and
$112.4 million was for students with in-state residency status. During the spring
2023 semester, 14,362 and 16,627 (33 and 39 percent) of enrolled students at
UMGC were classified as military and in-state, respectively.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMGC ensure that all residency status changes made
are subject to independent review and approval by ensuring that all such
25

--- Page 28 ---
changes are included on output reports currently used to conduct those
reviews.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) - University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) for the
period beginning October 1, 2018 and ending December 31, 2022. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMGC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, UMGC’s
monitoring of UMGC Ventures, student accounts receivable, cash receipts,
corporate purchasing cards, information systems security and control, payroll, and
student financial aid. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of financial transactions, records, and
internal controls and an assessment of compliance with State laws, rules, and
regulations with respect to UMGC’s Asian and European Divisions. These
Divisions, which according to UMGC’s records accounted for approximately 2.0
percent and 1.6 percent of UMGC’s fiscal year 2022 revenues, respectively, are
reviewed on a triennial basis by the USM internal auditors on whose work we
relied to reduce the scope of our audit work.
In addition, our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMGC
by the USM Office, such as endowment accounting, and by the University of
Maryland, College Park (UMCP), such as capital project management. These
support services are included within the scope of our audits of the USM Office
and UMCP, respectively. Furthermore, our audit did not include an evaluation of
internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal
financial assistance programs and an assessment of UMGC’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
27

--- Page 30 ---
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 1, 2018 to December 31, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UMGC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from UMGC’s financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
28

--- Page 31 ---
UMGC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UMGC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMGC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the UMGC that that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMGC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Exhibit 19
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
1
In December of 2020, Vendor A ended support for Product 1, and offered one year
of Extended Support ending on December 31, 2021, to institutions which, like
UMGC, were still on the 9.0 release. Extended support provides fixes for issues
that cause the product to stop functioning and a select number of Federal
regulatory updates including Financial Aid.
For the past three years, UMUC Ventures, in partnership with University of
Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) has been executing an initiative to move from
Product 1 to Product 2, coupled with Vendor B’s SaaS financial aid solution
[Product 3].
Introduction
In order to complete the move from Product 1 before the end of Extended Support,
UMUC Ventures is targeting a November 2021, go-live date. To feel confident in
moving forward the leadership at UMGC and UMUC Ventures felt they needed
answers to the following three questions:
• What is the current state of the Product 2/Product 3 initiative?
• Can we make the November 2021 Go-live Date?
• Once we understand our situation – what are our options moving forward?
2
9 In accordance with our policy, we have edited the independent vendor’s report to remove vendor names, logos, products,
and other identifying information.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
In order to answer these three questions, UMUC Ventures and UMGC engaged
the Independent Vendor to complete an inventory of the current state of the
program in the following areas:
• Program Governance
• Solutions Architectures
• Data conversion and migration
• Program Scope/Requirements
• System Configuration Status
• The Data Warehouse strategy and impacts
Introduction • Impact of the initiative on key business processes
• Organizational Change Management strategy
• System Integrations
In order to complete this inventory, between April 26 and May 7 the Independent
Vendor reviewed documentation provided by UMGC and UMUC Ventures and
interviewed 18 stakeholders. Stakeholders interviewed were from UMGC,
AccelerED, and Helio Campus. Interviews also included program leadership and
liaisons from the [Vendor C and Vendor B] vendors.
This document is a result of our interviews.
3
Summary The Independent Vendor identified significant issues in each area of our inventory.
There is not enough time to effectively resolve theses issues. Consequently, the
Product 2/Product 3 initiative will not be ready for a November 2021 Go-Live.
Going-live would also present significant, operational, financial and regulatory risk
to UMGC.
Overview
Effective governance is the solid foundation of any successful initiative. However,
- Engagement in the Product 2/Product 3 initiative there is simply no governance or control over
the Program. Key decisions are made that have significant impacts on areas of
Status the program and UMGC without any clear, structured decision process.
- Foundational Successful initiatives are led by the business to meet the institution’s strategic
goals. It is the institution that owns and drives the initiative. Currently relationships
Challenges
with Vendor C and Vendor B are with AccelerED and not UMGC. As a result, this
has become an “IT driven” program. UMGC does not have clear ownership of the
initiative and is not able to guide it to meet its strategic goals.
There is no agreed upon scope or requirements documentation on what Product 2,
Product 3, and AccelerED deliver. Without clear scope and set of requirements, it
is impossible to determine what will be delivered in November and how it will
operate. Furthermore, it is difficult if not impossible to validate all configurations are
complete, all needed data had been converted and the solution will deliver the
functionality the UMGC needs to operate.
4
31

--- Page 34 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
These foundational challenges are both structural and operational. Their impacts
Summary are felt in each area the Independent Vendor inventoried, preventing nearly all
areas from being able to make the November 2021 Go-live. UMGC, UMUC
Ventures, and the solution vendors should pause the Product 2/Product 3
program to take the following steps to be able recalibrate and make a new go-live
date.
The program needs to be structured so that UMGC has ownership of the Product
2/Product 3 initiative, guides it and has accountability for its success. UMGC and
UMUC Ventures needs to agree on and implement a governance framework to
Key Next Steps control all areas of the Product 2/Product 3 initiative. The structure should have a
clear set of decisions rights on who can make what decisions and how those
decisions will be determined, communicated and implemented.
UMGC, AccelerED, Vendor C and Vendor B must agree to and clearly document
the scope and functionality that will be delivered. If possible, this process should
be guided by an independent third party. This document needs to describe the
planned functionality in sufficient detail to become basis of the Go/No-Go decision
checklist. Use this document to verify the progress of each area and develop new
project schedule to confirm a new Go-live date.
UMGC and UMUC Ventures need to either negotiate a longer extended support
contract with Vendor A or engage a vendor who can provide regulator updates
and key fixes to the Product 1 until Product 2/Product 3 are live.
Review and resolve the issues identified in each area of the inventory. This is a
complex program, and all areas must operate smoothly with clear goals.
5
The current state of the Product 2/Product 3 Program is Red. Going‐live would
present significant, operational, financial and regulatory risk to UMGC. The following
section contains details and next steps for each area inventoried
Program Governance Solutions Architecture Data Conversion
Program Scope and
Requirements System Config Status Data Warehouses Strategy
Business Process Impact Organization Change Systems Integration
Management
Key: Red: Area is not ready and cannot go‐live without significant risk.
Yellow: Area could be ready for go‐live, but still has significant risk.
Green: Area is ready and could go‐live without significant risk
6
32

--- Page 35 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Program Governance
Not Ready for Go‐Live
7
Governance might be one of the most important aspects of any successful engagement. It is
PROGRAM
a program’s solid foundation, driven by a well-defined organizational structure with clear
GOVERNANCE
hierarchy, ownership and responsibility. Governance is built on clear vision, mission and
clarity that is communicated through all levels and structure of the organization. Through our
discussion and research, true governance of this engagement is glaringly missing. The
Overview current engagement has no strong governance in place to manage a complex project like the
- Structure Product 2/Product 3 initiative.
- Ownership The vendor contracts are with AccelerED and AccelerED contracts with UMGC. This
- Responsibility structure prevents any direct communication between the vendor and functional users.
Business requirements are communicated from UMGC through AccelerED to the vendor.
- Communications
- Oversight As a result, this is an IT led project. Key decisions are made by AccelerED team that will
impact UMGC without stakeholders’ involvement. The current structure of the Product 2/Product
3 Program prevents any real oversight by UMGC.
Not Ready for Go-Live
8
33

--- Page 36 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
In the original Product 2 charter, UMGC has not defined a governance framework. The
PROGRAM governance framework guides your ERP project team, decision-making, risk management,
and other key components of your project including ensuring executive and project team
GOVERNANCE
alignment. The project governance framework is the core guardrail that prevents the UMGC
project from drifting off course, scope creep, missed requirements and poorly designed
solutions. Governance puts UMGC in control of the project so it can guide it to successfully
Observation
meet the business’ needs. Simply put, without governance there is chaos.
- Framework
This project is being driven by AccelerEd and not by UMGC. AccelerEd goal is focused on
- Goal switching off of Product 1 by 12/31/20 and not ensuring business needs are being met.
- Timeframe There is no identified individual that has overall responsibility for the project and who is the
- Ownership accepted ‘face’ of the UMGC project.
- Design For example,
● No clear decision matrix or RACI chart that lays out roles and responsibilities and
decision rights for the engagement.
● Development is disjointed in terms of purpose and not strategically discussed with
stakeholders. The flexibility to stand up apps, is creating a system that may make the
system complex and costly and in the long run difficult to maintain.
● Modules are built, apps are created, third party solutions are acquired without a
review of need or impact, or coordination with users or other areas of the Product 2
Not Ready for Go-Live project
9
Impact:
The current state of the Product 2/Product 3 engagement is a direct result of the current lack of
PROGRAM governance.
GOVERNANCE
Mitigation:
Update engagement structure so that UMGC is leading the initiative. Ideally vendor contracts
Impact & should be between UMGC, Vendor C, and Vendor B. UMGC should then contract with
AccelerED to deliver the solutions.
Mitigation
Develop a project charter for the Product 2/Product 3 initiative that addresses, decision rights,
issue management, a RACI matrix, change control processes, and documented strategies for
the key areas of Development, Configuration, Conversion, System Architecture, Solutions
Architecture, Data Management, and Organizational Change Management.
Key Steps Forward:
● Identify a Senior Sponsor who has ultimate ownership of the Program.
● Develop a clear Requirements Traceability Matrix.
● Agree on AccelerEd implementation methodology and document project plans and
schedules accordingly.
Not Ready for Go-Live
10
34

--- Page 37 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Not Ready for Go‐Live
11
The original goal of the Product 2 initiative was to replace UMGC’s aging heavily modified
SOLUTIONS
Product 1 application with a single solution. Product 2 was selected with the understanding
ARCHITECTURE that out of the box it provided 97% of the functionality delivered in Product 1.
As the initiative progressed, gaps in the functionality were discovered and AccelerED and
Overview UMGC began to fill those gaps with third party vendors such as Vendor 2 for Financial,
large bolt-ons for Military, and a series of apps. The result is it forced the adoption of a
- Expectation
‘quasi’ microservices strategy of separate but integrated solutions built upon a Product 2
- Approach
platform core.
The goal of “vanilla” out of the box solution that would not be heavily modified has not been
met. It has been replaced with a complex architecture that requires a mature enterprise
architecture (EA) to ensure that the whole remains functional even during future refactoring.
Not Ready for Go-Live
12
35

--- Page 38 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
There is a heavy emphasis on integrations and interdependencies which require solid
SOLUTIONS enterprise architecture and governance execution frameworks that are currently lacking. Key
foundational software platforms have been changed mid-project, and new third party
ARCHITECTURE
software is being purchased without ensuring the software will function with Product 2 or
meet user’s needs. We identified a commitment to EA ‘principles’, but no adoption of an
actual EA framework with associated rigor. The Enterprise Architect is also the Technical
Observation Lead for the initiative. Each of these two roles are normally full-time positions.
- Strategy
Communication challenges between business stakeholders and program implementer results
- Solutioning
in reactive solutioning. AccelerED often does not involve business in solutioning.
- Adoption
The UMGC solutions architecture therefore appears to be evolving organically and without a
clear overarching strategy beyond building missing functionality as a bolt-on using apps or
purchasing of third-party solutions requiring integrations.
Not Ready for Go-Live
13
Impact:
SOLUTIONS
Resource Support / Availability - Ensuring business continuity with a documented 171 integrations
ARCHITECTURE
and 94 critical interdependencies between systems will demand a set of focus and skilled
resources.
Impact & ● The number of apps, third party software, and integrations will make maintenance and
upgrades more difficult and increase total cost of ownership.
Mitigation ● A key goal of having a single system is lost with addition of multiple systems.
● Managing data across the architecture creates fragmentation across multiple systems
making data management and analytics difficult.
Mitigation:
Need a clear and comprehensive solution architecture strategy vetted and agreed upon by UMGC.
● Implement a robust enterprise architecture framework that guides UMGC through the
business, information, process, and technology changes necessary to execute upon its
strategic objectives.
● Implement a governance process to ensure the impacts of integrating outside solutions and
apps on processes, data and technology, where cost of ownership are clearly understood
and agreed to.
Not Ready for Go-Live
14
36

--- Page 39 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Data Conversion
Could Go‐Live with Risks
15
Conversion is the most critical piece of any migration to a new system. There are thousands
DATA
and thousands of fields and tables that need to be mapped and validated in the new system.
CONVERSIONS While many technical resources will look at this as a technical exercise, the use of the data
makes it a functional exercise also. There are also many intersecting systems that are
dependent on the data that will be migrated into the system, these have to be validated and
tested to ensure the respective system can still manage their activities. For this project, there
Overview & are risks in the Data Conversion efforts. Below are some of our observations
Observations ● Conversion quality into the core Vendor C/Vendor B products is improving. For the
first six spins, AccelerED moved to the next spin regardless if all the issues in the
- Timeframe
current spin had been resolved. After Spin 6, there were over 300 data clean up
- Spin
issues that had accumulated. AccelerED paused the spin schedule for 10 months to
- Approach resolve these issues.
● The approach has been changed so the next Spin won’t start until most or all of the
- Data Structure
issues in the current Spin has been resolved. Spin 7 was significantly better and all but
- Mapping
10 issues were resolved before Spin 8. Spin 8, started Mid Feb, began validating on
March 1, Conversion issues are being resolved and Spin 9 scheduled for May 24,
2021.
Could Go-Live with Risks
16
37

--- Page 40 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
● The AccelerED Conversion team is not familiar with Product 1 data structures and
DATA needs greater support from UMGC to clean and validate converted data. But there is
CONVERSIONS a communication gap between the groups. AccelerED requested support to clean
and validate data but did not receive the support needed. UMGC feels it is on
AccelerED to clean and validate the data. In addition, UMGC has been slow to
respond to data questions regarding new functionality that included in scope.
Overview &
Observations ● The Military module has not seen any converted data. They require specific pieces of
- Timeframe information such as date of service, station location, data required for reporting to the
VA. Missing or incorrect data in this area is both an operational and compliance risk.
- Spin
- Approach ● New apps are being created and the conversion team does not know their data needs.
- Data Structure Third party software has been purchased and again the data conversion does not have
a complete picture of the new solution’s data needs.
- Mapping
.
Could Go-Live with Risks
17
Impact:
DATA
• The Data Conversion Spins are moving faster and the quality in each spin is increasing
CONVERSIONS
lowering the risk of poor data in core areas of the system.
• Due the lack of clarity for data requirements for apps, third party systems, and bolt-ons
Impact & such as Military there is a risk that key data will be missing at go live. This opens UMGC to
both significant operational, reporting and regulatory risks.
Mitigation
Mitigation:
Pause the conversion. Inventory all the apps, bolt ons and third-party solutions. Document their
data needs and map those needs back to the conversion process.
Could Go-Live with Risks
18
38

--- Page 41 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Not Ready for Go‐Live
19
There is no documented definition of the project scope or complete documented list of
SCOPE
requirements that AccelerED, Vendor C and Vendor B will deliver in the November go-live.
REQUIREMENTS
This makes it impossible to track progress to plan, validate which functions are being
delivered and do they meet requirements.
Overview &
Observations
AccelerED has moved to a phased Go-live approach where they will deliver any functionality
- Progress that is missing or not complete in future phases. The schedule and scope for these phases
have not been set. The Functional Leads do not know exactly what will be delivered in Phase
- Phased Deliv.
1, and if it is not delivered then, when will the functions will be delivered. This makes training
- Expectations
and resource planning impossible.
When we asked AccelerED what their understanding of scope UMGC was expecting,
AccelerED repeatedly stated that UMGC’s vision was still unrealistically high, and UMGC
didn’t understand they were only getting the very basics. When UMGC was asked about
AccelerED’s understanding of the scope to be delivered, UMGC they knew they were not
getting everything, and are concerned that capabilities that are essential for UMGC to
function were not going to be delivered.
Not Ready for Go-Live
20
39

--- Page 42 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
AccelerED and UMGC agree the goal is to “Replace the functionality in Product 1” but they
SCOPE don’t agree on what that actually means. AccelerED’s goal is to move off of Product 1 by
REQUIREMENTS December 31, 2021, when Vendor A support ends. Their definition of replacing Product 1
is being able to switch on a new system regardless if the system can deliver the base
functionality of Product 1. UMGC’s Functional leads definition is key functions in Product 2
will meet their business requirements as they did in Product 1.
Overview &
Observations
Communication between UMGC on the status of requirements poor. Student Accounts has
- Expectations delivered their requirement three times and still do not know exactly what will be delivered.
Records has identified a list of the 131 critical processes. As of the May 3, they have only
- Communications
seen the solution for 15 of those processes.
- Functionality
- Regulatory Risk Functionality needed by UMGC to operate will not be delivered or their status is unclear.
For example, The DPA report is still not completed, and it is unclear if it will be ready in time
to be tested. This report has major dependencies in every area. It has been described as
the crankshaft report of the University. Batch Enroll and Disenroll for Non-payment is not
being delivered. Student Accounts is not clear on the status of 1098T reporting which is due
soon after go live, which creates a major regulatory risk.
Not Ready for Go-Live
21
Impact:
Without clear agreement on the requirements and capabilities that will be delivered in “Phase I”
there is no way measure progress to plan and ensure required functionality is delivered. This
SCOPE
makes it impossible to make an informed Go/No-Go decision that does not present a high risk to
REQUIREMENTS
UMGC.
Currently UMGC will go live without key processes. This will have serious functional financial
Impact &
impacts on the University. The DPA report is a key report that is used to run the university. The
Mitigation
amount of manual process required as a result of not having Batch Enroll is unsustainable. 1098T
processing is a Federal tax reporting requirement. Not having it negatively impacts students and
opens UMGC to regulatory risk.
Without a clear understanding of what AccelerEd will deliver and how it will function, UMGC is
unable to train their staff in how the system works, guide their students or add resources in time to
mitigate the impact of major functions that were automated in Product 1 but are manual in Product
2.
Mitigation:
Pause the implementation. Develop an agreed upon scope for Phase I of the implementation and
the requirements Vendor C and Vendor B will have to deliver. Together they must develop a Project
Not Ready for Go-Live
and Resources plan to deliver those requirements. UMGC and AccelerED need to agree a set of
clear Go/No-Go criteria before resuming the implementation.
22
40

--- Page 43 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Not Ready for Go‐Live
23
SYSTEM It is difficult to determine accurate configuration status as there is no clear scope of what is to
CONFIGURATION be delivered and AccelerED and UMGC are still developing and validating business
requirements. Even though requirements are being validated, AccelerED believes
STATUS
configuration is 95% completed and on track. AccelerED has migrated 75% of Product 2
configurations into Test. Product 3 Configurations are 85% complete with a clear path
Overview & forward for creating the rest.
Observation
There are major configurations outstanding. For example, the status of Transfer Credit
- Configuration
articulation rules are unknown. There are roughly 1 Million articulation rules that are
Status configured in Product 1. This is vital configuration as the average UMGC student is a
transfer with between 40-50 credits. The functional lead for Military has only seen wireframes
- Ownership /
for his module and does not know of the status of his configuration.
RACI
Not Ready for Go-Live
24
41

--- Page 44 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
SYSTEM Impact:
CONFIGURATION There is no agreed upon requirements traceability matrix (RTM) to trace business requirements to
configuration requirements. It is impossible to validate if all configurations have been completed
STATUS
because of the misalignment of understanding between AccelerED and UMGC on what is being
delivered in Phase I.
Impact &
Mitigation Mitigation:
AccelerED and UMGC must agree on and clearly document the scope and requirements being
delivered in each Phase. Configuration requirements need to be based on that document.
AccelerED working closely with functional users need to complete thorough review of what
configurations have been completed and what is outstanding. Together they must develop and
execute a plan for moving forward. As new solutions are introduced or developed, AcellerEd and
UMGC must have a process for identifying and creating needed configuration for these new
solutions.
One person from AccelerED and one from UMGC needs to lead this overall effort.
Not Ready for Go-Live
25
Data Warehouses
Not Ready for Go‐Live
26
42

--- Page 45 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Helio Campus manages the Data Warehouse and reporting for UMGC. Like AccelerED it is a
third-party company that was spun off from UMGC. Helio Campus began fit gaps between
DATA
Product 1 and Product 2 in January, and they are working on three large projects at once –
WAREHOUSE
Product 2, Product 3 and Military. Most of the information they need is not being shared
STRATEGY
proactively, and they do not have mapping of all the sources of their data. They also do not
have a list of the business processes that will change. Helio Campus has requested
information on where information from the apps will reside - in the app or in Product 2 or
Overview &
another system. When they are missing data, they don’t know if it is a product issue or
Observation change in business process.
- Strategy
The team is taking ownership of their responsibilities and attempting to assemble a
- Alignment comprehensive inventory of needed queries and/reports and validate them with stakeholders.
They have shared a list of operational reports with AcclerED. They are replicating EDW
- Ownership
reports in Product 4.
There is however, anxiety about the integrations that feed data to mission critical resorts and
how calculated values will come to them. As a result, It is unclear how some critical daily
reports that contain calculated values will be created.
Product 5 was purchased without their involvement. The team feels the goal of using Product
Not Ready for Go-Live
5 to replace the Data Warehouse is not realistic due to the scale of information it can use.
27
Impact:
Reports essential to operate UMGC may not be available at Go-Live. Without understanding what
DATA processes have changed, what the data sources are, and a clear understanding of the new data
WAREHOUSE structures, the Data Warehouse team will not be able to ensure proper metrics are available to
STRATEGY create KPI’s and key reports. Without support from the functional users to help the Helio Campus
team understand the new business processes, they will not be able to design effective reports
each area needs.
Impact &
Mitigation
Mitigation:
AccelerED, UMGC, and Helio Campus must develop and execute plan for Helio Campus to
receive the information about business processes, source systems and data sources it needs to
support analytics and provide data for mission critical reports. One person from UMGC, Helio
Campus and AccelerED need to own this plan and ensure it is executed.
UMGC and Helio Campus need to develop a comprehensive list of “Day 1” reports that mission
critical for operating UMGC. These Day 1 reports must be in place and must be part of the Go/No-
Go criteria. Document requirements, data, data sources and extracts needed to create these
reports. Develop a plan for ensuring these reports are accurate and in place at go-live. Repeat the
same process for “Day 2” , “Day 5”, “Day 7” and “Day 30” reports.
Not Ready for Go-Live
28
43

--- Page 46 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Not Ready for Go‐Live
29
The impact the Product 2/Product 3 rollout on business processes and operations will be
BUSINESS significant. The Product 2 functionality being delivered by AccelerED is a significant step
PROCESS backwards from the functionality delivered in the current version of Product 1 being used by
UMGC. Key functions that are currently automated in Product 1 will be manual processes in
IMPACT
Product 2 requiring an increase in staff in both Records and Student Accounts. The DPA
Overview & report is currently not complete and is not functioning. There are Product 2 software issues
that are impacting the ability to create this report.
Observation
- Expectations Product 3 does not have a repacking feature. To repackage a subset of students all students
will go through packaging creating an hours’ long process. The ISIR verification process is
- Workarounds
not strong, creating manual work and leaving students at risk for not completing enrollment
- Scope
and going somewhere else.
- Staffing
How the Military Module will work is unclear, creating significant risks for students and for
UMGC. Student Accounts will not have a cashiering function, and may not be able to
complete 1098T reporting after go-live in a timely manner.
There will be other impacts that are not known until what is being delivered and how
processes will operate are clear.
Not Ready for Go-Live
30
44

--- Page 47 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Impact:
Student Records and Student Accounts would be significantly impacted by the lack of automation.
BUSINESS
Having to manually move thousands of students into their proper sections instead of using a batch
PROCESS
enroll process would require an increase staff and would not be sustainable. The inability of
IMPACT
Student Accounts to mass disenroll students for non-payment would have a significant financial
impact. In 2005 UMUC did not disenroll for non-payment and bad debt went up $18Million.
Impact &
The DPA report is the “Crankshaft” report that runs the institution. Each functional area has
Mitigation
dependencies on this report. If this report is not accurate and available on the first day of Product 2, the
impact on UMGC will be significant.
The length of time it will take to repackage students will impact when students are able to see
what they owe when they pay, and how and when they can set up payment plans.
Mitigation:
UMGC and AccelerED must agree and document on the scope of functionally being delivered in
Phase I. All functionality that will be delivered must be reviewed for the impact it has on business
process, finance and staffing. Where that impact is significant, mitigations must be agreed to and
must be included in the Go/No-Go checklist.
Not Ready for Go-Live
31
Organization Change
Not Ready for Go‐Live
32
45

--- Page 48 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
ORGANIZATION
Interviews with UMGC stakeholders and select vendors showed universal concern and low
CHANGE confidence about go-live readiness. But there was relatively high confidence in the go-live from
AccelerED, Vendor C and Vendor B. With this gap in confidence an effective change management
MANAGEMENT
and training program is critical. While there is no discernable rigorous change management
program, there are change management activities that are planed and underway.
One key is communication and setting expectations. Some people have been deep in the system
Overview &
and others have not. Some are aware of the scope of change and others have assumed
Observation expectations. Communication is a joint effort between UMGC and AccelerED. There are two
elements of corporate communication - internal and external and each have an owner
- Low Confidence
Each unit has a training resource and Vendor C has provided base training materials. However,
- Communication there are enough changes to the system and processes that these materials are obsolete. The
Product 2 system, the Military bolt-on and other third-party systems are still being designed built
- OCM Program
and changed. Scope continues to change. As a result, the design of Product 2 training materials
- Scope cannot start.
Not Ready for Go-Live
33
ORGANIZATION The OCM team has begun to design for training materials for the 19 apps and have started
CHANGE training beta testers. The OCM team needs more time from the project owners on which staff
needs to be trained on what topics. The OCM team is trying to get the involvement of the
MANAGEMENT business unit on configuration, and training people how to build reports and views. This training
will give staff early access and help them learn the system. However, business owners do not
feel they know enough about what will be delivered to provide the OCM team with the
information they need. Business stakeholders are not confident they will be ready for go-live and
Overview & adequately trained. The pre-cursor of this is confusion about phase one scope.
Observation
- Low Confidence
- Communication
- OCM Program
- Scope
Not Ready for Go-Live
34
46

--- Page 49 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
ORGANIZATION Impact:
CHANGE Training materials are being held up by requirements that are still in flux. The scope and
requirements need to be agreed to so the training team and the functional teams can identify who
MANAGEMENT
needs to be trained on what process. Creating training materials can’t begin until scope and the
functional designs are agreed to. An untrained or poorly trained staff will not be able to use the
Impact & system properly, creating errors and impacting the student experience.
Mitigation
Mitigation:
Create a clear agreed to scope and requirements document for what will be delivered in Phase 1.
Use this as the basis for developing an OCM and training strategy and plan. Create a training
schedule with the Functional Leads.
Not Ready for Go-Live
35
Not Ready for Go‐Live
36
47

--- Page 50 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
Systems Integration System integrations play a critical role in aligning data and processes through multiple
solutions to allow for UMGC to effectively support their customers needs in a manner that is
seamless to its constituents. The effort should allow UMGC to manage its respective
processes as activities are executed through the journey of its constituents.
There are 80 different integrations being built using two different platforms. Any information
Overview &
that comes from Vendor C to a third party uses Product 6. Any data that comes back to
Observation Vendor C is relayed in Product 7. Product 7 sends their information back to the services bus
where logic apps send it back to Vendor C. There is also a datalink between Product 2 and
- Two Platforms Product 3.
- Visibility
The Integration team has adopted an agile approach and have know the status of each build.
They are more focused on reusable integrations than in the past.
As solutions like the Military bolt-on are developed or other solutions are acquired more
integrations will be needed. The Military business owner has not seen the designs of the bolt-
on and is not sure the configuration and integrations will be in place.
Not Ready for Go-Live
37
Impact:
The current approach to integrations using two different platforms will increase technical debt and
System Integration
the resource time needed for maintenance. Two integrations will have to be maintained and
updated any time there is a change to an integrated solution. The cost of ownership will also
increase due to the need to maintain two platform licenses. The rapid pace of changes to the
Product 2 ecosystem runs the risk that needed integrations will be missed or not built and tested
in time for Go-live.
Impact &
Mitigation Mitigation:
Inventory all software that are being built or purchased to create the Product2/Product 3 based
solution. Implement a freeze on the inclusion of new applications, early enough that any needed
integrations can be developed, but late enough to ensure needed functionality is delivered.
Develop clear documentation of the scope of integrations and the data required. Work with UMGC
Functional Leads to ensure the proper data is being integrated with the proper timing.
Over time, shift to a single integration approach to reduce complexity and total cost of ownership.
Not Ready for Go-Live
38
48

--- Page 51 ---
Exhibit 1
UMGC Final Report from Independent Vendor
CONTACT US
39
49

--- Page 52 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
August 8, 2024
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Global Campus
Period of Audit: October 1, 2018 through December 31, 2022
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Global Campus. Our comments
refer to the individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Gregory Fowler, President, UMGC
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Mr. Eugene Lockett, Vice President and CFO, UMGC
Mr. Joseph Sergi, SVP and COO, UMGC

--- Page 53 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) Business
Initiatives
Finding 1
We identified certain activities that raise questions as to whether UMGC’s
continued relationship with Ventures and its affiliates is in the best interest of
UMGC and the State, including being the primary revenue source for
Ventures and AccelerEd.
We recommend that UMGC, in conjunction with USM,
a. conduct periodic formal, documented, comprehensive evaluations,
including a cost benefit analysis, to determine the extent to which the
intended purpose, objectives, and goals of creating UMGC Ventures,
AccelerEd, and HelioCampus, and placing AccelerEd and HelioCampus
within Ventures have been achieved;
b. review the aforementioned Ventures’ activity to ensure that the related
funds were used as intended;
c. determine if any adjustment to its relationship with and continued use of
these entities is warranted, for example whether any services should be
brought back in-house; and
d. update the USM BOR on the results of the evaluations and any resulting
adjustments.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/25
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and will conduct a formal comprehensive evaluation,
corrective action or including a cost benefit analysis, to determine the extent to which the
explain disagreement. intended purpose, objectives, and goals of creating UMGC Ventures and
AccelerEd, and placing AccelerEd within Ventures have been achieved.
Since Ventures was stood up in 2016, the ed tech market has shifted
dramatically, including new regulations at federal level around third-
party services and online program managers and a post pandemic shift
by many institutions to a DIY model. The current UMGC leadership,
which began in 2021, also believes the time is right for UMGC to
Page 1 of 11

--- Page 54 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
consider what potential Ventures has to provide value add to UMGC. In
terms of Helio Campus, UMGC will conduct competitive procurement
to select its next analytics provider, as well as a cost benefit analysis of
utilizing an external partner to provide analytics services.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/25
Please provide details of UMGC agrees to review the aforementioned Ventures’ activity to ensure
corrective action or that the related funds were used as intended, related to bullets 2 and 3 of
explain disagreement. the above analysis.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/25
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and will use the above evaluation of AccelerEd and
corrective action or Ventures to determine whether any adjustment to its relationship with
explain disagreement. and continued use of these entities is warranted. In addition, UMGC will
conduct a cost benefit analysis of utilizing an external partner to provide
analytics services.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/25
Please provide details of UMGC agrees to update the USM Chancellor and the BOR on the
corrective action or results of the evaluations and any resulting adjustments.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 11

--- Page 55 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
UMGC obtained information technology (IT) services from Ventures and its
subsidiaries totaling approximately $184.1 million during November 2018 to
December 2022 without competitive procurement and without verifying that
the amounts paid were proper.
We recommend that UMGC
a. take steps to ensure IT services are procured on a competitive basis;
b. adjust its Professional Services Agreement to require Ventures to provide
documentation of the steps it takes to find the best qualified and most
advantageous vendors for each SOW;
c. ensure that invoices include a breakdown of services provided and costs
incurred for the period;
d. discontinue the use of contingency fees without a clear definition of
permitted usage, a requirement to report usage, and clarification as to the
disposition of unused fees; and
e. include the key components identified by the aforementioned vendor’s
report in future SOWs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of UMGC disagrees based on this statute: Education § 12-113 provides that
corrective action or State Finance & Procurement Division II does not apply to transactions
explain disagreement. between a HIEDA and the institution that established, financed, or
operated the HIEDA. UMGC’s agreements with the HIEDAs it
established, financed, or operated would be exempt from SF&P Division
II and not subject to competitive procurements.
Auditor’s Comment: The response indicates disagreement and notes that, by law,
transactions with the HIEDA that UMGC established are not subject to competitive
procurement requirements. The report acknowledges this fact, but also notes that the law
does not prohibit competitive procurement and that competitive procurement helps to
ensure that the most capable vendor is selected at a competitive cost.
Page 3 of 11

--- Page 56 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
In light of the significant issues noted in this report and the unique relationship between
UMGC and Ventures we continue to believe UMGC should take steps to ensure IT
services are procured on a competitive basis.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and has included language in its next Master Professional
corrective action or Services Agreement to require Ventures to provide documentation of the
explain disagreement. steps it takes to find the best qualified and most advantageous vendors
for each SOW.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and will ensure that invoices from Ventures include a
corrective action or breakdown of services provided and costs incurred for the period.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and has discontinued the use of contingency fees in its
corrective action or Master Professional Services Agreement with Ventures.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and will incorporate the missing key components
corrective action or identified by the independent vendor in future SOWs as appropriate.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 11

--- Page 57 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
UMGC did not adequately monitor an IT project being developed for its use
by Ventures, which was ultimately determined to be unusable and
abandoned after UMGC expended $25.7 million.
We recommend that UMGC
a. ensure that contracted services are routinely, adequately, and
independently monitored and evaluated to help ensure the proper and
timely receipt of all required deliverables;
b. ensure that a provision for liquidated damages for non-performance is
included in its contracts; and
c. consult with legal counsel regarding the potential for collecting liquidated
damages relating to the closed SIS project noted in this finding.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/24
Please provide details of UMGC will ensure that large-scale IT projects are routinely, adequately,
corrective action or and independently monitored and evaluated by UMGC’s Enterprise
explain disagreement. Project Management Office (EPMO) to ensure the proper and timely
receipt of all required deliverables.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and will include liquidated damages provisions in future
corrective action or IT projects, as appropriate.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/03/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and has consulted with legal counsel regarding the
corrective action or potential for collecting liquidated damages relating to the closed SIS
explain disagreement. project noted in this finding.
Page 5 of 11

--- Page 58 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
Advertising Contracts
Finding 4
UMGC did not have formal documented procedures for assigning work to
pre-qualified vendors for two master advertising contracts totaling $500
million, and related statements of work were not sufficiently detailed to allow
for effective monitoring by UMGC.
We recommend that UMGC
a. establish formal procedures for selecting and assigning work to
prequalified vendors, such as the basis for selection and required
documentation supporting the selection;
b. use competitive procurement within prequalified vendors for individual
tasks;
c. ensure that task orders or SOWs contain sufficient details to enable
effective monitoring and receipt of requested services and deliverables;
and
d. establish performance measures, such as impact on enrollment, when
establishing SOWs to help direct future use of the contracts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Although UMGC did not have a documented procedure for selecting
additional comments as vendors from those approved under the solicitation, UMGC did ensure
deemed necessary. that the most cost-effective vendors were selected.
The requested services are intentionally broad because the value-add of
vendors – as experts at advertising media buying – is to determine all the
details of purchases to be made. UMGC directs vendors on our target
audience and our goals, primarily to drive the most cost-effective leads,
applications, and enrollments. It is the vendors’ expertise that determines
the number of ads, and when/where they appear. Vendors are then held
accountable for achieving good pricing, and driving cost-effective leads,
applications, and enrollments. These all are monitored through weekly
reports submitted by the vendors.
Out-of-market cost-per-enrollment has improved since this contract was
approved, which has contributed to significant increases in new
enrollment, outcomes have significantly increased during that time
period as well.
Page 6 of 11

--- Page 59 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/01/24
Please provide details of UMGC’s selections among pre-qualified vendors is based on 1) their
corrective action or technical proposal and the capabilities/strengths detailed within, 2) their
explain disagreement. more recent capabilities/strengths in this rapidly changing field, and 3)
our conversations/experience with the vendors. However, these were not
formally documented. UMGC will document this going forward.
Recommendation 4b Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of UMGC does not agree that competing each SOW is necessary or
corrective action or practical given our business model for advertising. Effective advertising
explain disagreement. is based on continuous testing and learning. Constantly shifting vendors
will result in lost knowledge and inefficiency.
The existing solicitation process ensures competition, requiring each
selected agency to submit portfolio and technical responses regarding
their capabilities. During this multi-month process, detailed information
on capabilities and experience is obtained and is leveraged by UMGC in
future SOW decisions. In addition, ongoing, continued conversation with
vendors aid in the assessment of each vendor’s new
capabilities/strengths.
Auditor’s Comment: UMGC disagrees with using competitive procurement within
prequalified vendors, noting that it is not necessary or practical given its business model
for advertising. As noted in the report, it was UMGC’s initial intention to provide for
competition among the prequalified vendors. With competitive procurement, UMGC
would still be in a position to determine and select the most capable and cost-effective
vendor. Consequently, we continue to believe that use of a competitive procurement
process within the prequalified vendors is appropriate.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/01/24
Please provide details of Several monitoring mechanisms are listed on UMGC’s SOWs (data to
corrective action or be received daily, weekly reports and meetings, log-in access to vendor
explain disagreement. systems, etc.). However, SOWs do not explicitly state that these will be
used for monitoring. UMGC will make this more explicit in SOWs
going forward.
Recommendation 4d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/01/24
Please provide details of Performance measures are discussed in detail each week with our
corrective action or vendors where we review data, key metrics, and reports on performance.
explain disagreement. However, these performance measures have not been documented on
SOWs. UMGC will explicitly state this on SOWs going forward.
Page 7 of 11

--- Page 60 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
UMGC did not adequately justify two sole source procurements of
advertising services and did not consolidate the procurements which we
believe circumvented University System of Maryland (USM) Procurement
Policies and Procedures.
We recommend that UMGC comply with USM Procurement Policies and
Procedures regarding sole source procurements. Specifically, we recommend
that UMGC
a. ensure that the sole source procurement method is used only when a
single vendor can meet the contract requirements, and adequately
document the sole source justification; and
b. consolidate sole source procurements for the same services and obtain
required approvals when total procurement amounts exceed established
limits.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide UMGC did not consolidate the contracts for each service as they are two
additional comments as different services. The vendor OLA identified could not provide the
deemed necessary. same level of service UMGC required. The use of annual contracts as
opposed to a multi-year contract was related to the need to review
performance and subsequent funding availability prior to re-engaging for
additional terms.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees with the recommendation to only use the sole source
corrective action or procurement method in compliance with the USM Policies and
explain disagreement. Procedures. In the future, UMGC will procure these services in
compliance with the USM Procurement Policies and Procedures
following the Competitive Sealed Proposal method of procurement, to
ensure that there are no other available vendors which can meet these
needs.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees and will consolidate sole source procurements for the
corrective action or same service and obtain required approvals when the total procurement
explain disagreement. amounts exceed established limits. In the case referenced above, these
advertising contracts are for two different services; exclusive educational
sponsorship for a unique, Veteran-specific radio broadcast; and digital
Page 8 of 11

--- Page 61 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
advertising in multiple Veteran-oriented segments. UMGC will have
individual contracts for the two different services being provided and
will utilize a multi-year contractual approach and seek all necessary
approvals for these two competitively bid contracts.
Page 9 of 11

--- Page 62 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
UMGC did not adequately control and account for collections, which totaled
$7.3 million in fiscal year 2022.
We recommend that UMGC
a. record all checks received in the mail immediately upon receipt, and
b. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions using initial recordation
documents.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees with the finding and has begun recording all checks
corrective action or received in the check log upon receipt.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/16/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees with the finding and has modified its deposit verification
corrective action or process to document the independent review verifying the amount
explain disagreement. deposited agrees with checks received.
Page 10 of 11

--- Page 63 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Global Campus
Agency Response Form
Student Residency Status
Finding 7
UMGC’s procedures for reviewing residency changes were not sufficiently
comprehensive, resulting in 67 percent of residency changes not being
subject to independent review and approval.
We recommend that UMGC ensure that all residency status changes made
are subject to independent review and approval by ensuring that all such
changes are included on output reports currently used to conduct those
reviews.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/26/24
Please provide details of UMGC agrees with the finding and has begun to audit residency changes
corrective action or based upon effective date instead of the term.
explain disagreement.
Page 11 of 11

--- Page 64 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CIA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Albert S. Kim
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Brian M. Webbert
Staff Auditors
Christopher C. Pitre
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors