Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Department of Information Technology


Related Report Dated (3/29/2024)

Video Presentation (Department of Information Technology starts at 28:45)
Date: 09/04/2024
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66d9cadd2b02b366477e5669
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:09:29.364983
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Report Dated March 29, 2024
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Robert A. Wells, CPA
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
September 4, 2024

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 DoIT is responsible for the State’s information technology policies,
provides information technology technical assistance, and oversees
the implementation of major information technology development
projects (MITDPs) for the State’s Executive Branch agencies. DoIT
also manages the State’s information technology network (known as
networkMaryland).
 The audit report covers the period from May 7, 2018 to December
31, 2022. The report contains 15 findings, including 4 non-
cybersecurity-related repeat findings (Findings 2, 4, 15, and 16)
from the prior audit report.
 OLA determined that DoIT’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system OLA
established in conformity with State law. The primary factors
contributing to this rating were the significance of the audit findings
and the number of repeat findings.
Department of Information Technology Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 Findings 1 through 4– DoIT should assume greater oversight of MITDPs
to ensure they are on budget and on schedule and that projects are
accurately reported.
 Findings 5 through 7 – DoIT did not provide effective oversight of two
MITDPs we reviewed - MD THINK and eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA).
 Findings 8 through 10 – DoIT used the networkMaryland contract to
award significant work unrelated to networkMaryland without
considering a competitive procurement process and certain work
orders were not sufficiently detailed and DoIT did not adequately
ensure that amounts invoiced was related to work performed.
 Findings 11 through 14 – Information Systems Security and Control
(see confidential addendum).
Department of Information Technology Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Major IT Development Projects (Finding 1)
DoIT should assume greater oversight responsibility to ensure that
MITDPs were completed on time and on budget.
 DoIT delegated significant responsibilities to State agencies
without ensuring the agencies had sufficient resources and
qualified personnel.
 DoIT did not assist with the selection of agency project managers
or contractors procured by agencies to design, develop, and
implement MITDPs.
 DoIT did not review and approve contract modifications initiated by
agencies and was not always familiar with the nature and scope of
the modifications.
 DoIT did not review and approve contractor invoices to ensure
State agencies were properly reviewing the invoices.
Department of Information Technology Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Major IT Development Projects (Finding 2) Repeat Finding
DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they were on budget and
on schedule and that changes to the scope and cost of the project were
appropriate.
 DoIT did not always document its review and approval of annual agency
project status reports, prior to submitting them to DBM and the
Department of Legislative Services for budget analysis purposes.
 DoIT did not review the methodology of key estimates, such as cost and
schedule, and did not obtain an explanation for significant changes. For
example, DoIT was unable to explain why the estimated cost to complete
for two projects increased by over $1 billion.
 DoIT did not always review and approve changes in scope.
 DoIT did not ensure the Oversight Project Managers (OPMs) verified the
accuracy of information in MITDP monthly health assessments provided
by State agencies.
Department of Information Technology Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Major IT Development Projects (Finding 3)
DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate OPMs hired
through vendors to assist with monitoring MITDPs.
 The evaluations did not consider specific job duties (such as
assessing the need for Independent Verification and Validation
assessments (IV&V)) to determine OPM success, resulting in the
assessments not being an effective tool to monitor OPMs in an
observable, measurable, and objective manner.
 Our test of quarterly evaluations for 5 OPMs disclosed that each
evaluation reflected “satisfactory” for each performance area and
did not include comments from DoIT to support the rating. For
example, one evaluation stated the OPM “strives to consistently
improve in all areas.”
Department of Information Technology Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Major IT Development Projects (Finding 4) Repeat Finding
DoIT could not support cost data and conclusions included in its annual
report submitted to the Governor, DBM, and General Assembly, and did
not always include changes in schedule, cost, and other identified
problems with MITDPs, as required by State law.
 For one project (MMIS II), the annual report stated there were no
known or anticipated cost changes. However, the reported
estimated cost to complete increased by $108.8 million from the
preceding year’s report.
 For another project (MD THINK), the annual report stated there were
“no project risks to report” even though DoIT knew, prior to
submitting the report, there were major issues with the project.
Specifically, a recent IV&V Report, reported high risks related to
scope and time management, and medium risk with cost
management and testing and validation.
Department of Information Technology Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Major IT Development Projects (Finding 5)
DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the increase in MD
THINK costs from the initial $166.4 million to $588.8 million and
delays in the system implementation.
 As of October of 2022, there were 17 contract modifications to the
MD THINK project that included scope changes and time
extensions, including adding additional agency applications and
extended cloud services. The modifications extended the contract
completion dates from an original estimated completion date of
May 2021 to the end of fiscal year 2023.
 Various concerns regarding the development and management of
MD THINK were identified in both a forensic audit and an IV&V.
Department of Information Technology Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Major IT Development Projects (Finding 6)
DoIT did not ensure that IV&V findings were resolved timely by the
Department of Human Services and the MD THINK Executive
Committee.
 Our review of IV&V reports issued from January 2020 through May
2022 identified 251 issues including 29 high risk issues. As of
May 2022, 33 of 251 issues were open, including 15 high-risk
issues. Although high-risk issues require immediate action, 14 of
the 15 high-risk issues had remained open from 3 to 27 months.
 Not addressing critical issues identified by the IV&V timely can
lead to a project not being fully functional, not meeting schedule
goals, or exceeding budgets. DoIT believed it lacked the
necessary authority to ensure critical IV&V findings are
appropriately resolved and corrected.
Department of Information Technology Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Major IT Development Projects (Finding 7)
DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the development and
implementation of eMMA resulting in significant delays and changes
to the cost and scope of the project.
 DoIT did not adequately ensure the eMMA project had an overall
integrated schedule for project tasks and there was no standard
method for tracking percentage of completion for the project.
 Even though eMMA has a significant impact on the State’s
procurement processes, DoIT did not treat the procurement as a
statewide system, which would have been guided by an executive
steering committee.
 No formal action was taken by DoIT to resolve the project issues
noted in the monthly health assessments or the open items from
the IV&V report.
Department of Information Technology Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
networkMaryland (Finding 8)
DoIT used the networkMaryland contract to award significant work
unrelated to networkMaryland without considering a competitive
procurement process. According to DoIT’s records, as of January 31,
2023, it awarded work orders to the vendor under the current
contract valued at $51.2 million.
 DoIT effectively sole sourced 14 work orders for staff
augmentation totaling $16.8 million as of January 2023, to the
networkMaryland vendor, therefore bypassing Board of Public
Works approval.
 DoIT also used the networkMaryland contract for cybersecurity
remediation services. As of January 2023, DoIT had approved the
use of 11 cybersecurity remediation work orders totaling $25
million.
Department of Information Technology Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
networkMaryland (Finding 9)
DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for agency staff
augmentation services under the networkMaryland contract and
documentation of certain work orders could not be provided.
 DoIT did not adequately verify amounts paid from three work
orders totaling $9.1 million for staff augmentation at the Maryland
Department of Health.
 Our test of six work orders disclosed three work orders totaling
$21.1 million had inaccurate work order amounts or expenditure
information.
 DoIT did not have a record of all subcontractors and approved
work orders did not identify the subcontractor(s).
 Two work orders totaling $2.7 million were not approved until we
requested copies of the work orders approximately 10 months
after the work began.
Department of Information Technology Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
networkMaryland (Finding 10)
DoIT issued cybersecurity remediation services work orders totaling
approximately $25 million that were not sufficiently detailed and did
not adequately ensure that amounts invoiced related to work
performed.
 DoIT work orders did not correlate estimated costs to specific
deliverables or progress to improve the level of DoIT’s
cybersecurity, and many deliverables were not clearly defined.
 DoIT did not ensure labor hours billed were accurate, the related
work was completed, or hours billed were proper and supported.
 DoIT could not readily provide sufficient documentation that work
performed in relation to the hours billed adequately supported the
propriety of amounts invoiced and were for related activities.
Department of Information Technology Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 15 – Enterprise Technology Support Services (Repeat Finding)
DoIT did not have formal written agreements with 57 of the 130 State
and local entities receiving ETSS and did not recover $4.8 million from
nine entities with agreements for services provided.
Finding 16 – Equipment (Repeat Finding)
DoIT did not adequately control its equipment inventory and did not
maintain accurate detail records.
Department of Information Technology Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security and Control (Findings 11 through 14)
Redacted cybersecurity-related findings.
See confidential addendum.
Department of Information Technology Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DoIT should:
• assume greater responsibility to ensure that MITDPs are implemented on time and on
budget;
• ensure annual agency project status reports and monthly health assessments are
submitted, reviewed and approved for accuracy, including support for changes;
• ensure performance evaluations adequately demonstrate OPMs are satisfactorily
performing job duties;
• ensure annual MITDP reports are accurate and supported, including cost estimates,
anticipated changes, and externally identified problems;
• ensure issues identified by monthly health assessments and IV&Vs are resolved and
corrected and provide significant oversight of the MD THINK and eMMA projects;
• modify the networkMaryland contract to clearly define the scope;
• ensure labor hours are accurate prior to payment; and
• ensure work orders and deliverables are clearly defined.
Department of Information Technology Page 16