Title: University System of Maryland - University System of Maryland Office
Date: 09/11/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66e4a94c6148a2c52fcd8aab
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:09:38.899524
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland Office
September 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 11, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland Office, for the period beginning August 20, 2018 and ending September
30, 2022. The Office develops system-wide policies and procedures; monitors
academic, financial, and administrative performance; provides system-wide
financing through the issuance of bonds; and provides management information
for planning and decision-making to the 12 institutions and 3 regional higher
education centers of the University System of Maryland.
Our audit disclosed that the Office needs to enhance and revisit certain system-
wide policies. Specifically, the Office has not established sufficient policies and
procedures for its institutions to follow when procuring goods and services off
contracts procured by other entities. Moreover, the Office has recently removed
the requirement that the use of the contract must be in the best interest of the
institution. While the use of such contracts can result in savings and efficiencies,
it is incumbent on the Office to establish procedures to ensure its institutions use
and document their due diligence before using these contracts demonstrating for
example that the contracts were competitively procured, authorized for use by the
institution and were in the best interest of the institution.
The Office also did not establish procedures for its institutions when awarding
financial assistance to students who also receive tuition waivers. As a result,
students, including System employees and their families, may receive financial
aid that is not warranted since they do not have to pay tuition charges due to
tuition remission and may abuse this benefit when applying for financial aid.
We also found that the Office did not maintain records of the Centers and
Institutes at each USM institution to ensure they were operating in accordance
with USM policies and had been approved as required. In addition, we noted that
the Office’s cash receipts were not adequately secured prior to deposit, and there

--- Page 4 ---
was a lack of assurance that all collections were deposited. Furthermore, our
audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in accordance with the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we have redacted the findings from this audit report. Specifically, State law
requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a
manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is made available
to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we
have determined that the redacted findings fall under the referenced definition.
The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were previously communicated to
those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that the Office satisfactorily addressed one of the two
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
The Office’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while the Office
generally agrees with the findings and recommendations, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings and recommendations. In each instance, we reviewed and
reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding.
In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included “auditor’s comments” within the Office’s response to explain our
position. Furthermore, we will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with the Office. In accordance
with our policy, we have edited the Office’s response to remove vendor names or
products. Finally, consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of the
Office’s response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Financial Statement Audits 7
Major Information Technology Implementation Project 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Contracts Procured By Other Entities
Finding 1 (Policy Issue) – The University System of Maryland Office 9
had not established sufficient procedures for University System of
Maryland (USM) institutions to follow when using contracts procured
by other entities.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2 (Policy Issue) – The Office did not have a policy to require 10
institutions to consider tuition remission when awarding student
financial aid.
Centers and Institutes
* Finding 3 – The Office did not maintain a current and comprehensive 11
listing of all Centers and Institutes established by USM institutions and
did not ensure that the establishment of those Centers and Institutes
had been adequately justified by the respective institutions as required.
Cash Receipts
Finding 4 – The Office did not adequately safeguard cash receipts prior to 12
deposit and did not have sufficient procedures to ensure all collections
were subsequently deposited.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 13
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 13
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University System of Maryland Office develops system-wide policies and
procedures; monitors academic, financial, and administrative performance;
provides system-wide financing through the issuance of bonds; and provides
management information for planning and decision-making to the 12 University
System of Maryland (USM) institutions. The Office oversees the development
and management of the USM’s three regional higher education centers: the
Universities at Shady Grove, the USM at Hagerstown, and the USM at Southern
Maryland. The Office also serves as the staff to the Board of Regents.
According to the State’s records, the Office’s expenditures totaled approximately
$239.9 million during fiscal year 2022 (See Figure 1 on the following page).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
The Office’s Positions, Expenditures, and Funding
Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 93 86.1%
Vacant 15 13.9%
Total 108
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 16,872,483 7.0%
Technical and Special Fees 75,926 0.0%
Operating Expenses 222,947,875 93.0%
Total $239,896,284
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $ 17,944,802 7.5%
Higher Education Investment Fund 2,299,189 1.0%
Other Revenues1 5,916,285 2.4%
26,160,276 10.9%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 391,618 0.1%
PAYGO State Funds 213,203,000 88.9%
Other Gifts, Grants and Contracts 141,390 0.1%
213,736,008 89.1%
Total $239,896,284
Source: State financial records and the Office’s personnel records
1
1 Includes revenues from other sources ($5.1 million) and transfers (to)/from Fund Balance ($0.8
million).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Financial Statement Audits
An independent accounting firm is engaged by the Office for the purpose of
expressing an opinion on the System’s financial statements each year. In the
related audit reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2019, 2020, 2021, and
2022, the firm stated that the basic financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of the System, and the respective changes
in financial position and cash flows for the years then ended, in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Major Information Technology Implementation Project
In fiscal year 2022, a consortium of five USM institutions, also known as
Maryland Connect, selected an enterprise resource planning (ERP) software to
replace the majority of their existing information technology systems, for example
finance and human resources. The Office entered into a contract with the
software vendor providing the ERP platform at a cost of $18.4 million for annual
subscription and training fees on behalf of the five institutions in order to serve as
the centralized oversight and funding source for the project. The Office also
contracted with two separate vendors for project oversight and implementation
services for four years at a total cost of $28.2 million.
As of January 2023, the three vendors had been paid a total of $11.9 million. As
of August 2024, the Office advised that certain modules have been implemented
for all five institutions. The final module is projected to be fully implemented in
February 2025.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 30, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 2
on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined
that the Office satisfactorily addressed one of the two findings. The remaining
finding is repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Office did not ensure each University
System of Maryland (USM) institution filed
policies and procedures, as required, for the
Repeated
Finding 1 establishment and monitoring of its Centers
(Current Finding 3)
and Institutes, and did not have a
comprehensive listing of all such Centers
and Institutes.
The Office had not established a policy
Finding 2 governing the use of interagency agreements Not repeated
by USM institutions.
Malware protection for the Office’s
computers was not sufficient to provide
Finding 3 adequate assurance that the computers were Status Redacted2
properly protected against malicious
software.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1244(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contracts Procured By Other Entities
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
The University System of Maryland Office had not established sufficient
procedures for University System of Maryland (USM) institutions to follow
when using contracts procured by other entities.
Analysis
The Office does not require USM institutions to document the steps they take to
comply with BOR policy requirements for the use of contracts procured by other
entities. In addition, we noted that in June 2024 (subsequent to our audit) the
BOR approved the removal from its policies the requirement to ensure that the
use of such contracts was in the best interest of the applicable institution. We
question the removal of that important requirement. As of August 8, 2024, this
and certain other BOR policy adjustments were pending approval by the Board of
Public Works.
BOR policies and procedures allow institutions to use contracts procured by other
organizations, institutions, or agencies provided that the established contract was
awarded after a proper procurement process, and the terms of the applicable
contract do not prohibit use by the University System of Maryland. BOR policies
also required use of the contract to be in the best interest of the institution.
However, we were advised by the Office that the BOR approved the removal of
this requirement during its June 14, 2024 meeting. While it may be understood
that institutions should act in their best interest, we believe that including that
requirement in policy for this procurement method made it clear to institutions
that the method was not to be used just for convenience or expediency, or in any
way abused, and that they would be required to explain why this method best
served the institution over other available procurement methods.
Our review of the BOR policies disclosed that they do not specifically require the
institutions to document compliance with policy requirements for this
procurement method. Consequently, there is no record of the institution’s efforts
to comply with the requirements, and no means to readily verify that any action
was taken at all. Moreover, the lack of this requirement has been the basis for a
disagreement with our recommendations at one institution.
Similar documentation is required of other State agencies for certain
procurements (such as intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements) by
State law and regulations. Consequently, implementing a process to document
9

--- Page 12 ---
compliance with Board policies is appropriate and reasonable to ensure
compliance with the USM requirements for the use of such contracts.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. require USM institutions, when using contracts established by other
organizations, institutions, or agencies, to document for each such
contracts the steps taken to comply with BOR policy requirements for
using such contracts; and
b. develop and propose to BOR any necessary action to ensure that BOR
policies include a requirement that use of such contracts is in the best
interest of the institution.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2 (Policy issue)
The Office did not have a policy to require institutions to consider tuition
remission when awarding student financial aid.
Analysis
The Office did not have a policy to require institutions to consider tuition
remission when awarding student financial aid. For example, although the BOR
Policy on Institutional Student Financial Aid for Undergraduate Students requires
institutions to develop policy guidelines for the award of aid including criteria
based on need or merit or a combination of both, it did not specifically require
institutions to consider tuition remission when awarding such aid. As a result,
students may receive financial aid that is not warranted since they do not have to
pay tuition charges due to tuition remission.
Our November 1, 2023 audit report on Coppin State University (CSU) noted that
certain individuals appeared to have taken advantage of the USM tuition
remission policy and certain COVID relief aid provided to students. Specifically,
we noted three CSU employees who enrolled in just one class for two semesters
and, as enrolled students, received relief funds as well as remission of their tuition
costs as permitted for USM employees.3 These employees received a combined
total of $8,390 in refunds for these two semesters. None of the three employees
were enrolled in the prior or subsequent semester, and they were all classified as a
non-degree seeking students.
3 BOR policy provides tuition remission to eligible USM employees, as well as their spouses and
dependent children.
10

--- Page 13 ---
We noted one other USM institution with a financial aid policy that requires
consideration of tuition remission and other tuition waivers when awarding aid.
A system-wide requirement to consider tuition remission when awarding aid
would help to ensure consistency between institutions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office develop a policy that requires USM
institutions to consider tuition remission when awarding financial aid, and if
revision to current BOR policies and procedures is necessary to implement
this requirement, the Office should develop and propose to the BOR the
necessary revision.
Centers and Institutes
Finding 3
The Office did not maintain a current and comprehensive listing of all
Centers and Institutes established by USM institutions and did not ensure
that the establishment of those Centers and Institutes had been adequately
justified by the respective institutions as required.
Analysis
The Office did not maintain a current and comprehensive listing of Centers and
Institutes at each USM institution and did not ensure that the establishment of
those Centers and Institutes had been adequately justified by the respective
institutions as required. Centers and Institutes are generally organized, non-
departmental units that may or may not have external or State funding and a
separately identified budget. The Centers and Institutes address a wide variety of
disciplines, including engineering, health and biomedical research, environmental
research, and entrepreneurship. Centers and Institutes are not Affiliated
Foundations, for which there is a separate and distinct BOR policy.
BOR policy requires that Centers and Institutes be justified by the applicable
USM institution on the basis of their contribution to the specified missions of
research and service and by their relationship to instructional programs at the
institution. In addition, the policy requires approval from the USM Chancellor or
the BOR for certain types of Institutions and Centers.
Our review disclosed that, as of February 2023 the Office’s listing of Centers and
Institutes had not been updated since March 2020. For example, our inquiries of
three USM institutions identified 14 Centers and Institutes that were not on the
Office’s current listing. Furthermore, the Office has not obtained documentation
11

--- Page 14 ---
from any institution supporting the specific justification for its Centers and
Institutes. Without a current listing and the related justification, the Office cannot
be sure that all Centers and Institutes have been accounted for, properly justified,
and received any necessary approval prior to being established.
The lack of a comprehensive listing of Centers and Institutes was commented
upon in our preceding audit report. In response to that report, the Office
developed a listing of established Centers and Institutes, but as noted above, did
not periodically update the listing to ensure it was complete and accurate. Our
preceding report also noted that because of a lack of centralized records at the
Office, we did not determine if all Centers and Institutes had been justified. We
previously recommended that the Office make that determination, and the Office
agreed to do so, but as noted above, no documentation of these determinations
was maintained.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. maintain a comprehensive listing of all current Centers and Institutes
established by USM institutions (repeat), and
b. use that listing to determine and document that each USM institution has
adequately documented that each Center and Institute is justified on the
basis of its respective contribution and relationship to the instructional
programs at the institution (repeat), and
c. ensure that any required approval from the Chancellor or Board of
Regents has been obtained.
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
The Office did not adequately safeguard cash receipts prior to deposit and
did not have sufficient procedures to ensure all collections were subsequently
deposited.
Analysis
The Office did not adequately safeguard cash receipts prior to deposit and did not
have sufficient procedures to ensure all collections were subsequently deposited.
Collections (primarily checks) received directly by the Office during our audit
period totaled approximately $6.3 million.
Our review disclosed that checks were not always properly safeguarded prior to
deposit. Specifically, the employee responsible for initially recording checks was
12

--- Page 15 ---
only at the Office two days a week. Any mail, including checks, received on
other than those two days remained unsecured at the employee’s desk until the
employee returned.
Furthermore, our review disclosed that the Office’s deposit verification
procedures did not include a verification of the initial record of checks received to
validated deposit documentation from the bank to ensure that all funds received
had been deposited. After processing, Office collections were taken to the
Cashier’s Office on USM’s College Park campus for deposit. Our review
disclosed that when conducting the deposit verification the Office only agreed the
initial record to a second record of checks prepared prior to submission to the
Cashier’s Office and not to validated bank records. In addition, the verification
was only being performed semi-annually for all deposits occurring during the
prior six-month period. Under these conditions, errors or other discrepancies
could occur without timely detection.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Office
a. secure all collections, such as in a locked safe, prior to deposit; and
b. conduct timely deposit verifications, which include agreement of the
initial record of checks received to validated deposit documentation from
the bank.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 5 and 6 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with the Office’s responses, have been redacted from
this report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland Office for the period beginning August 20, 2018 and ending September
30, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included endowment funds, revenue bonds, disbursements,
cash receipts, payroll, information systems security and control, and certain
University System of Maryland Board of Regents policies. Our audit included
support services (that is, endowment accounting and bond financing) provided by
the Office on a centralized basis for other units of the University System of
Maryland. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Office by the
University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP), such as processing vendor
payment transmittals and payroll. These support services are included within the
scope of our audits of UMCP. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation
of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal
financial assistance programs and an assessment of the Office’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 20, 2018 to September 30, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
14

--- Page 17 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
In addition, this report includes findings, which are identified as a “Policy Issue.”
Such findings represent significant operational or financial-related issues for
which formal criteria may not necessarily exist and for which management has
significant discretion in addressing, but the recommendation represents prudent
and/or practical actions, which we believe should be implemented by the agency
to improve outcomes. A less significant finding was communicated to the Office
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to the Office and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
16

--- Page 19 ---
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the results of our review
of its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
September 5, 2024
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland
Period of Audit: August 20, 2018 through September 30, 2022
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland. Our comments refer to the individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office

--- Page 21 ---
University System of Maryland Office
Agency Response Form
Contracts Procured By Other Entities
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
The University System of Maryland Office had not established sufficient
procedures for University System of Maryland (USM) institutions to follow
when using contracts procured by other entities.
We recommend that the Office
a. require USM institutions, when using contracts established by other
organizations, institutions, or agencies, to document for each such
contracts the steps taken to comply with BOR policy requirements for
using such contracts; and
b. develop and propose to BOR any necessary action to ensure that BOR
policies include a requirement that use of such contracts is in the best
interest of the institution.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of Cooperative purchasing is an authorized procurement method under the
corrective action or USM Procurement Policies and Procedures. A procurement officer is
explain disagreement. granted authority to determine the best procurement method to utilize to
meet the needs of their institution. USM Procurement Policies do
authorize institutions to develop their own policies and procedures as
long as they are consistent with the USM Procurement Policies: “Each
institution of the USM shall be responsible for developing policies and
procedures for use of the following methods that are consistent with
those set forth below and with the needs of the individual institutions.”
(page 9 of 96 of USM Policies and Procedures) Individual institutions of
USM could therefore require the documentation suggested by OLA, but
it is not a requirement of the USM Procurement Policies.
Auditor’s Comment: The Office disagrees with our recommendation stating that
institutions could develop their own policies requiring documentation. Given the
significance of these procurements, we believe that documenting the compliance with
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 22 ---
University System of Maryland Office
Agency Response Form
USM policy should be required for all institutions and should not be left to their
discretion. Moreover, the lack of this requirement has been the basis for a disagreement
with our recommendations by at least one institution.
Recommendation 1b Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The USM Procurement Policies authorize the use of contracts
corrective action or established by other Organizations, Agencies or Institutions after a
explain disagreement. procurement process (including Sole Source or Negotiated Procurement)
and provided that the terms of the applicable contract do not prohibit use
by the University System of Maryland.
Auditor’s Comment: USM does not address the specific recommendation and merely
reiterates its policy authorizing the institutions to use these contracts. As stated in our
Analysis, while it may be understood that institutions should act in their best interest, we
believe that including that requirement in policy for this procurement method made it
clear to institutions that the method was not to be used just for convenience or
expediency, or in any way abused. Given that the USM policy allows the institutions to
use contracts procured by other entities even when they were not competitively procured,
we believe that the institutions should have to justify and document why the use of those
contracts are in the best interest of the institution.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 23 ---
University System of Maryland Office
Agency Response Form
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2 (Policy issue)
The Office did not have a policy to require institutions to consider tuition
remission when awarding student financial aid.
We recommend that the Office develop a policy that requires USM
institutions to consider tuition remission when awarding financial aid, and if
revision to current BOR policies and procedures is necessary to implement
this requirement, the Office should develop and propose to the BOR the
necessary revision.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide While it is factually accurate that there is no requirement in Board
additional comments as Policy, USM institutions already consider tuition remission as part of
deemed necessary. Estimated Financial Assistance (EFA) when determining Federal, State,
and institutional student financial assistance and act consistent with
Federal and State educational aid reporting regulations. There could be
a policy gap to address when certain reporting regulations for traditional
State or Federal student aid may not apply.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of USM will recommend to the BOR that current policy be revised to
corrective action or require the consideration of tuition remission when awarding financial
explain disagreement. aid.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 24 ---
University System of Maryland Office
Agency Response Form
Centers and Institutes
Finding 3
The Office did not maintain a current and comprehensive listing of all
Centers and Institutes established by USM institutions and did not ensure
that the establishment of those Centers and Institutes had been adequately
justified by the respective institutions as required.
We recommend that the Office
a. maintain a comprehensive listing of all current Centers and Institutes
established by USM institutions (repeat), and
b. use that listing to determine and document that each USM institution has
adequately documented that each Center and Institute is justified on the
basis of its respective contribution and relationship to the instructional
programs at the institution (repeat), and
c. ensure that any required approval from the Chancellor or Board of
Regents has been obtained.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide As of December 2022, this was true. We completed an update shortly
additional comments as thereafter.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2023
Please provide details of As of December 2022, our listing was outdated.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. We have a current listing as of March 2023. Although not mentioned in
the recommendations, we also gathered the campus policies and
procedures for the establishment and monitoring of Centers and
Institutes policies.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2023
Please provide details of Based on the March 2023 Submissions, per attestations by the University
corrective action or Presidents (or their designees) the centers are justified based on its
explain disagreement. respective contribution and relationship to the institutional programs at
the institution.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2023
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 25 ---
University System of Maryland Office
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of We have reviewed Recommendation C and the current listing of
corrective action or Centers and Institutes. We have conducted an online search and
explain disagreement. reviewed BOR and office files and have not found evidence that the
listed Centers and Institutes are administratively separate from
their institutions.
Additionally, with the exception of UMB/UMCP Centers or Institutes
created under and funded by Mpower, we have not found evidence
that listed Centers or Institutes are multi-institutional. The
University of Maryland Strategic Partnership Act of 2016 (Mpower) is
a law “deepens the alliance and energizes UMB and UMCP to
pursue even greater transformative change and impact, far
surpassing what each institution could do independent of each
other” and “promotes innovation and impact through collaboration
between the University of Maryland, Baltimore and the University of
Maryland, College Park”. The law formalized the structure and has
led to countless partnerships including the creation of many
Centers and Institutes. Since Mpower’s Centers and Institutes are
created under this law (which began with and still has BOR/USM
support), the USM staff has not required UMB or UMCP to
request/obtain Chancellor approval of those specific, multi-
institutional Centers and Institutes.
When the USM conducts its regular update of the listing of Centers
and Institutes in Fall 2024, we will ask Presidents to highlight any
administratively separate or multi-institutional Centers or Institutes
or to attest that they do not have such Centers or Institutes. We will,
again, review and work to verify that information. If that inquiry
reveals that Centers or Institutes are in need of Chancellor or BOR
action, the USM Office of Academic and Student Affairs and Office
of Research and Economic Development will partner to secure
necessary approvals as quickly as possible.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 26 ---
University System of Maryland Office
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
The Office did not adequately safeguard cash receipts prior to deposit and
did not have sufficient procedures to ensure all collections were subsequently
deposited.
We recommend that the Office
a. secure all collections, such as in a locked safe, prior to deposit; and
b. conduct timely deposit verifications, which include agreement of the
initial record of checks received to validated deposit documentation from
the bank.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2023
Please provide details of The mail is properly secured in a locked cabinet until the receiver takes
corrective action or custody of the checks for deposit.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2024
Please provide details of USM relied on University of Maryland, College Park to perform the
corrective action or bank reconciliation. However, going forward USM will implement its
explain disagreement. own procedure to reconcile the check log to the bank statement on a
monthly basis.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 27 ---
University System of Maryland Office
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 5 and 6 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the findings, including
the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with the Office’s responses, have
been redacted from this report copy, the Office’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditors
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Mya N. Cofield
Staff Auditor
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors