Title: Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City
Date: 09/13/2024
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66e4a96c6148a2c52fcda2b2
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:09:58.784142
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
September 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 13, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the management practices of the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City (BLLC) as required by the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. BLLC issued 1,138
alcoholic beverage and adult entertainment licenses during license year 2023, and
fiscal year 2022 revenues (the most recent data available) totaled $2.7 million,
primarily derived from license fees.
The law requires our audit to focus on BLLC operations relating to licensing,
inspections, disciplinary procedures, and management oversight, which broadly
represent the four audit objectives established. BLLC had findings in the
following three areas reviewed.
Licensing
BLLC did not always follow established procedures for processing and
controlling license collections and certain procedures need improvement to
ensure collections are properly deposited.
Inspections
BLLC did not ensure information in the inspection database was entered
accurately and did not always retain the inspection reports to support the
information recorded. In addition, BLLC did not conduct at least one annual
routine inspection of each licensee as required.
Management Oversight
Although BLLC monitored Board and employee compliance with State ethics
filing requirements, it did not ensure employees submitted an annual conflict

--- Page 4 ---
of interest questionnaire as required by its policies for compliance with
statutory independence restrictions in State law regarding secondary
employment and business investments.
This is our fourth audit of the BLLC and we have noticed continual improvement
in BLLC audit results with the number of report findings decreasing from 24 in
our first report to 4 in this report. That said, three of the four findings are
repeated from our prior report including one finding related to collections that was
included in two preceding reports dating back to July 13, 2016.
Our overall audit scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on page 5.
BLLC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of the response which will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. In accordance with our
policy, we have redacted any vendor names or products mentioned by BLLC in
this document.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Board and the staff of the BLLC. We also wish to acknowledge the Board’s
willingness to address the audit issues and to implement appropriate corrective
actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 5
Audit Scope 5
Objectives and Methodology 5
Fieldwork and Agency Response 7
Background Information 8
Agency Responsibilities 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Objective 1 – Licensing
Objective and Methodology 11
Background 11
New and Transfer Licenses 13
License Renewals 14
Conclusion 14
Findings
* Finding 1 – BLLC did not always follow its standard operating 14
procedures for processing and controlling collections.
Objective 2 – Inspections
Objective and Methodology 16
Background 16
Conclusion 18
Findings
* Finding 2 – BLLC did not ensure information in the inspection database 18
was entered accurately and did not always retain inspection reports
to support the information recorded.
Finding 3 – BLLC did not conduct at least one annual inspection of 19
each licensee.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology 21
Background 21
Conclusion 23
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology 24
Conclusion 24
Findings
* Finding 4 – BLLC did not obtain annual conflict of interest questionnaires 24
from its employees and commissioners as required by its policy.
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
The State Government Article, Section 2-1220(f) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, requires the Office of Legislative Audits, at least once every four
years, to conduct a performance audit of the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City (BLLC) to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the management practices of BLLC and the economy with which
BLLC uses resources. The law also states the audit shall focus on operations
relating to licensing, inspections, disciplinary procedures, and management
oversight.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained for our findings and conclusions met those standards.
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. Evaluate the adequacy of procedures for alcoholic beverage licensing and the
maintenance of related records, and determine if the licensing process
complied with State law and Board requirements.
2. Evaluate the adequacy of BLLC policies and procedures for conducting
inspections of alcoholic beverage licensees and maintaining related records,
and to determine whether inspections were performed in accordance with
governing laws, policies, and procedures.
3. Evaluate the disciplinary process and determine if BLLC complied with
applicable State law, enforced applicable Board rules and regulations
governing licensees, and maintained accurate disciplinary records.
4. Evaluate management processes to determine whether proper oversight exists
over BLLC operations.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies
and procedures established by the Board and BLLC administrative personnel
governing the licensing process and related records. We also reviewed pertinent
sections of BLLC’s Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City:
2020 Policy and Procedure Manual that governs BLLC administrative functions
and the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor
5

--- Page 8 ---
License Commissioners for Baltimore City most recently revised in 2024, which
governs the conduct of licensee business operations.
Additionally, we interviewed BLLC staff to determine the processes used to issue
licenses, conduct inspections, administer disciplinary proceedings, and maintain
related records. We also observed the licensing and disciplinary hearing
processes.
We obtained data files of current BLLC licensees as of July 2023 and a report of
the licenses transferred and renewed during license year 2023 (May 1, 2022
through April 30, 2023) from the BLLC licensing database; this database is stored
on the servers maintained by the Baltimore City Mayor’s Office of Information
Technology. We also obtained a data file of inspections performed during license
year 2023 from a separate inspection database maintained by the Baltimore City
Office of Information and Technology. We used these data files to perform
various tests of the licensing, inspection, and disciplinary processes, and
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined these data files were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes used during the audit.
We also reviewed the licensee paper files and the minutes of Board hearings that
evidenced the decisions and actions taken by the Board. Finally, we obtained
records of complaints registered through Baltimore City’s “311” Customer
Service Request System (311 System) to evaluate BLLC’s process for following
up on complaints.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed. In addition to the conditions included in this report,
other findings were communicated to BLLC that were not deemed significant and,
consequently, did not warrant inclusion in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from July 2023 to December 2023. BLLC’s
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
audit report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BLLC regarding the results of
our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The operations of the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City
(BLLC) are governed by Title 12 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland for alcoholic beverage licensing, and
by Subtitle 1 of Article 15 of the Baltimore City Code for the licensing and
regulation of adult entertainment businesses. BLLC is responsible for processing
applications for and renewals of licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor; conducting
periodic inspections of businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages; collecting
all license fees and fines; fining, suspending, or revoking the licenses of violators
of alcoholic beverage laws; and licensing and regulating adult entertainment
businesses in Baltimore City. BLLC also issues licenses for special events (such
as one-day licenses for beer and wine festivals) and for special venues (such as a
casino, zoo, or stadium).
All BLLC revenues from licenses issued, fines, and late fees are paid to Baltimore
City’s Director of Finance, and all BLLC expenditures, including employee
salaries, are paid by the City. Furthermore, BLLC is included in the City’s annual
budget and its financial activity is included in the City’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report. According to Baltimore City records, BLLC’s fiscal year 2022
revenues (the most recent data available) totaled approximately $2.7 million and
expenditures totaled $2.5 million.1 In accordance with State law, BLLC revenues
in excess of its expenditures and salaries are to be used by the Mayor and City
Council for the general purposes of the City.
BLLC is governed by a three-person board, plus one alternate member. The
Mayor of Baltimore appoints two members and the President of the City Council
of Baltimore City appoints one member and the alternate member. The
appointments are subject to the advice and consent of the Maryland Senate. As of
August 2023, BLLC had 20 employees—which included 3 executive staff, 1
supervising inspector, 9 full-time inspectors, and 5 support staff—as well as a
part-time appeals counsel and a community liaison contractual employee. Except
for the executive secretary and deputy secretary, all employees of the Board are in
the classified civil service of the City.
Between March 2020 and June 2022, BLLC’s operations were impacted by the
COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically, the Governor’s Executive Order,
1 According to the 2025 Baltimore City Budget, the City implemented the financial modules of a
new enterprise resource planning system in August 2022. Due to quality issues associated with
this implementation, fiscal year 2023 actual spending data was not included in the 2025 Budget.
8

--- Page 11 ---
effective March 12, 2020, permitted State and local government licensees to
extend license and permit renewals for license years 2019-2020 and 2020-2021
until 30 days after the pandemic state of emergency was rescinded (July 1, 2021).
Furthermore, during the period from March 16, 2020 through June 1, 2020, all
restaurants and bars in Baltimore City were closed (except for food and beverages
carry-out, drive-through, or delivery), which resulted in BLLC performing
focused inspections to ensure that establishments complied with the executive
order.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 8 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated May 11, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 1 on the
following page, we determined that BLLC satisfactorily addressed 5 of these
findings. The remaining 3 findings are repeated in this report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
BLLC did not always follow its Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) for securing and processing cash receipts Repeated
Finding 1
and certain procedures need improvement to ensure all (Current Finding 1)
collections are properly deposited.
BLLC’s SOPs did not include certain critical aspects of the
Finding 2 Not repeated
inspection process.
BLLC did not always retain inspection reports to support the
information recorded in the inspection database. Additionally, Repeated
Finding 3
the recorded information was not independently reviewed for (Current Finding 2)
accuracy.
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs when investigating and
Finding 4 documenting complaints received through Baltimore City’s Not repeated
311 Complaint System.
BLLC inspectors did not always follow up on inspection
Finding 5 violations and did not always appropriately document Not repeated
conclusions when conducting inspections.
BLLC’s process to monitor the inspections of licensed
establishments did not provide assurance that all licensees
Finding 6 Not repeated
were subject to an annual inspection or inspected at
appropriate frequencies.
BLLC did not track and monitor instances of licensee
noncompliance that did not involve the Baltimore Police
Finding 7 Not repeated
Department or the Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office to ensure
that each was properly addressed.
BLLC did not have an ongoing internal process to identify
Repeated
Finding 8 potential conflicts regarding interests in the alcohol beverage
(Current Finding 4)
industry consistent with State law specific to BLLC.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 – Licensing
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the licensing process was to evaluate the adequacy of Board of
Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City (BLLC) procedures for
alcoholic beverage licensing and the maintenance of related records, and to
determine, based on this evaluation and transaction testing, if the licensing
process complied with State law and Board requirements. To accomplish our
objective, we reviewed applicable State laws, the BLLC Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City: 2020 Policy and Procedure Manual (SOPs)
and the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor
License Commissioners for Baltimore City.
Additionally, we interviewed BLLC staff to determine the processes used to
collect fees; issue, renew, and transfer licenses; and maintain related records. We
obtained data files of the current licenses as of August 2023 and a report of the
licenses transferred and renewed during license year 2023 (May 1, 2022 through
April 30, 2023) from the BLLC automated licensing system maintained by the
Baltimore City Mayor’s Office of Information Technology. We used the license
files to perform various tests of the licensing process including license renewals,
license transfers, and collection of related cash receipts. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Background
BLLC processes applications for new licenses, license renewals, and transfers of
existing licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor in Baltimore City and licenses adult
entertainment businesses in the City. There are different classes of alcoholic
beverage licenses, and each are valid for a one-year period ending April 30.
 Class A licenses are issued to liquor stores.
 Class B licenses are issued to restaurants, and other special venues as
described in law, including arenas, hotels/motels, casinos, zoos, and stadiums.
 Class C licenses are issued to non-profit private clubs.
 Class D licenses are issued to taverns.
BLLC also issues licenses for special events (such as beer and wine festivals) and
adult entertainment licenses for a one-year period ending June 30.
11

--- Page 14 ---
According to BLLC records, there were 1,116 alcoholic beverage and 22 adult
entertainment licenses, excluding special event licenses, issued during license
year 2023. Annual fees for alcoholic beverage licenses are established in State
law and vary depending on the type of establishment and the beverages sold. The
Baltimore City Code establishes the $1,000 annual fee for an adult entertainment
license, which is in addition to the alcoholic beverage license fee, if applicable.
Figure 2 includes the types of licenses issued by BLLC and the related license
fees. Additional permits and other privileges with fees can be found in Figure 3.
Figure 2
Annual License Fees and Licenses Issued for License Year 2023
Annual
Licenses
License Type License
Issued
Fee
Class A Beer and Wine1 $110 16
Class A Beer, Wine, and Liquor1 $858 171
Class A - 2 Beer, Wine, and Liquor2 $858 7
Class B Beer and Wine3 $165 8
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (seating capacity of 200 or fewer)3 $1,320
334
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (seating capacity greater than 200)3 $1,800
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Hotel/Motel)3 $6,500 30
Class B-D-7 Beer, Wine, and Liquor3 $1,320 384
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Video Lottery Facility)4 $15,000 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Video Lottery Concessionaire)4 $5,000 0
Class C Beer and Wine $83 8
Class C Beer, Wine, and Liquor $550 43
Class D Beer and Wine3 $165 36
Class D Beer, Wine, and Liquor3 $825 47
All Other Alcoholic Beverage Licenses Varies 31
Adult Entertainment $1,000 22
Total Licenses 1,138
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland, Baltimore City Code, and BLLC’s Licensing Records.
License Type Class: A-Package Goods; B-Restaurant; C-Private Membership Club; D-Tavern
Notes:
1 Class A beer, wine, and liquor licenses are valid for six days a week from 6 a.m. to 12 a.m. the
following day.
2 Class A-2 beer, wine, and liquor licenses are valid for six days a week from 9 a.m. to 12 a.m. the
following day.
3 Class B and Class D beer, wine, and liquor licenses are valid for seven days a week operations.
4 There was one Video Lottery Concessionaire licensee in license year 2023, however BLLC issues
a single license to the Video Lottery Facility, therefore, the table states ‘0’ Video Lottery
Concessionaire licenses were issued.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 3
Additional Permits and Privileges and Related Fees
Permits and Other Privileges Annual Fee
Live Entertainment (for Class B) $500
Off Premises Catering (for Class B) $500
Outdoor Table Service (for Class B) $200
Beer and Wine Tasting (for Class A) $25/per day
One Day Beer and Wine $25/ per day
One Day Beer, Wine, and Liquor $50/ per day
Special Amusement License (for Class D) $750
Refillable Container Permit (Without Off Sale Licenses) $500
Refillable Container Permit (With Off Sale Licenses) $50
Growler Fee $50
Special Sunday (for Class A) $75
Special Supplemental License (for class D) $75
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland
New and Transfer Licenses
Applicants for new licenses and license transfers complete and submit an
application form and $600 application fee to BLLC. In addition, applicants
submit information for a criminal background check (for any new license
holders). A license transfer occurs when there is a change in ownership or
location, or when a licensee wants to provide additional services (such as live
entertainment) not covered by the existing license.
Applications are processed by BLLC staff who are to ensure applicants include all
required information and pay the appropriate fees. The Board schedules public
hearings to review the new and transfer applications, and to vote on approval of
the licenses. If approved, applicants must submit additional documents to BLLC
(such as a valid trader’s license and proof of personal property tax payment).
Once all documentation is submitted, BLLC staff will notify the applicant when
the license is ready for pick up and the applicant will pay the appropriate license
fee at that time and the license will be issued.
According to the Board, there has been a moratorium on the issuance of new
licenses since 1968, except for restaurant, arena, and hotel licenses, or as
authorized by law. In license year 2023, there were approximately 33 transfers
finalized according to BLLC’s system.
13

--- Page 16 ---
License Renewals
BLLC mails all current licensees a renewal application prior to March 1 of each
year. By law, licensees must file a renewal application between March 1 and
March 31. Renewal applications with the renewal processing fee ($50) are
submitted to BLLC either by mail or in person. BLLC may assess a late fee of
$50 per day, up to a maximum of $1,500, for renewal applications submitted after
March 31 of each year. BLLC staff will notify the applicant when the license is
ready for pick up and the applicant will pay the appropriate annual license fee at
that time. To retain their licenses, licensees must provide certain documents,
including a copy of a valid trader’s license and proof of payment of personal
property taxes, by June 30th of each year.
Conclusion
BLLC did not always follow its Board of Liquor License Commissioners for
Baltimore City: 2020 Policy and Procedure Manual (SOPs) for processing and
controlling collections. Consequently, assurance was lacking that all collections
were accounted for.
Findings
Finding 1
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs for processing and controlling
collections.
Analysis
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs for processing and controlling cash
receipts. According to Baltimore City records, BLLC’s fiscal year 2022 revenues
totaled approximately $2.7 million.
Our review disclosed that BLLC did not adequately separate duties over license
collections and deposit verification, and a documented independent review of
these deposit verifications was not performed as required by its SOPs.
Specifically, the employee who prepared checks for deposit and delivered the
checks to the Baltimore City Department of Finance (DoF) for bank deposit and
recordation into the City’s accounting records, also reconciled the deposit
documentation to these accounting records to ensure all receipts were properly
accounted for. This employee was also assigned capabilities in the BLLC’s cash
receipts and licensing systems which allowed the employee to record a collection
and later void the collection, without any supervisory review. Furthermore, an
independent review of the deposit verification by supervisory personnel was not
performed and documented as required by the SOP. Consequently, this employee
could misappropriate collections without detection.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Similar conditions regarding the reconciliation process were commented upon in
our two preceding audit reports. In response to our prior report, BLLC disagreed
with our recommendations primarily due to its assertion that its procedures were
compliant with Baltimore City government cash handling policies and procedures.
As noted in our auditor comment to their response, we believe that these
recommendations are valid controls needed to ensure the integrity of the
collection process. Despite the prior disagreement, BLLC established SOP
requirements for independent supervisory reviews of deposit verifications, but
such reviews were not performed.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BLLC follow its SOPs for processing and controlling
cash receipts. Specifically, BLLC should ensure deposit reconciliations are
performed and voided transactions are reviewed by an employee without
access to collections using original source documentation (repeat).
We advised BLLC how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Objective 2 – Inspections
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the inspection process was to evaluate the adequacy of BLLC
policies and procedures for conducting inspections of alcoholic beverage
licensees and maintaining related records, and to determine whether inspections
selected for review and testing were conducted in accordance with governing
laws, policies, and procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies
and procedures established by the Board and BLLC administrative personnel
governing the inspection process and related records. Additionally, we
interviewed BLLC staff to determine the processes used to schedule, conduct,
record, and monitor inspections.
We obtained a data file, which we deemed reliable for our purposes, from the
inspection database maintained for BLLC by the Baltimore City Office of
Information and Technology. The database included 6,416 inspection-related
activities conducted during license year 2023. We judgmentally selected 30
inspections to determine if they were properly conducted in accordance with
BLLC policies, documented, and supported with an inspection report. We also
analyzed the inspection database used to record inspection dates and other
relevant information to determine if all licensed establishments received an
inspection in license year 2023.
Finally, we tested 15 complaints registered through Baltimore City’s “311”
Customer Service Request System (311 System) to evaluate whether BLLC
properly handled complaint-initiated inspections.
Background
BLLC conducts periodic inspections of businesses licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages as well as licensed adult entertainment businesses in Baltimore City.
State law does not specify the frequency of or establish a schedule for required
inspections, but BLLC management advised us that its informal goal is to conduct
four inspections of each licensee annually. BLLC conducts the following
inspections and related activities:
 Routine inspections are inspections of licensed liquor establishments to
determine if they are open and operating in full compliance with the Alcoholic
Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City (such as validity of licenses and bathroom
16

--- Page 19 ---
operation and cleanliness). BLLC management advised us that its informal
goal is to annually conduct at least one routine inspection of each licensee.
 Compliance inspections are to determine whether an establishment is open
and operating, and there are no significant peripheral violations.
 Investigation inspections of licensees are usually conducted based on
complaints or tips received from the public (such as for allegations of
underaged drinking or illegal gambling), concerns noted by inspectors during
a routine inspection, or to follow up on a violation. These investigations may
be conducted with other government agencies such as the Baltimore Police
Department.
 Inspections of licensees in response to complaints received from the Baltimore
City’s 311 Customer Service Request System are referred to as 311 complaint
inspections. The 311 System allows City residents to file complaints by
telephone or online. The 311 System’s employees refer complaints to the
appropriate agency for follow up. Agencies receiving the referrals may
update the complaint system with the current status and ultimate complaint
resolution. This information is available to the public via the 311 System
website.
 New/transfer application activities are completed by inspectors at the site of a
proposed new license or the transfer of an existing license to another location
to post a sign and gather information. This information includes if the
location is the required distance away from schools and how many liquor
establishments are within a defined area.
 Sign-posting activities are completed by inspectors at a licensed establishment
or an establishment for which the license is pending Board approval. The
inspector places the sign and takes photos indicating it was placed, and the
photos are then uploaded into the inspection database.
 One-day inspections occur for special events, such as beer and wine festivals,
to ensure the event is operating according to the Alcoholic Beverages Rules
and Regulations for the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for
Baltimore City.
BLLC has written guidance over the Inspection Division operations. Specifically,
the Alchoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Balitmore City provides specific guidance to licensees and is
used as criteria for determining violations. State law requires BLLC to review
17

--- Page 20 ---
these Rules and Regulations every five years. In addition, as a result of our
preceding audits, BLLC prepared SOPs that were approved by the Board in 2016
and were last updated in 2020. The SOPs present detailed procedures related to
inspection activities including frequency goals and types of inspections.
Based on Board policy and professional judgment, establishments are subject to
multiple inspections of a similar type (such as routine inspections) or specizalized
inspections (such as complaint-based), which are often initated by external
sources. According to BLLC records, during license year 2023, BLLC conducted
6,416 inspection-related activities, which consisted of 1,897 routine inspections,
2,218 compliance inspections, 1,108 investigation inspections, 802 inspections in
response to 311 System complaints, 195 transfer/new application activities, 195
sign-posting activities, and 1 one-day event inspection.
Conclusion
BLLC did not ensure information in the inspection database was entered
accurately and did not always retain the inspection reports to support the
information recorded. In addition, BLLC did not ensure that each licensee was
subject to at least one annual routine inspection.
Findings
Finding 2
BLLC did not ensure information in the inspection database was entered
accurately and did not always retain inspection reports to support the
information recorded.
Analysis
BLLC did not ensure information in the inspection database was entered
accurately and did not always retain inspection reports to support the information
recorded. In response to our preceding audit, BLLC established a policy to
require that the Chief Inspector perform a review of 15 to 20 inspections each
month. Specifically, the Chief Inspector was to compare information in the
database to supporting documentation to ensure it was entered accurately by the
applicable inspector and to document the results of the review in the inspection
database.
Our review disclosed that there was no documentation of the reviews since
December 2020. BLLC management advised us that approximately 5 reviews are
being performed each month but could not document these assertions.
18

--- Page 21 ---
We selected 30 routine and compliance inspections recorded in the inspection
database during license year 2023 and compared the information to the related
inspection reports to determine if the inspection results were accurately recorded.
Our test disclosed that, while data was generally reflected accurately in the
inspection database, BLLC could not provide the original inspection reports for 2
of the 30 inspections to support the accuracy of the information recorded.
Similar conditions relating to an independent review of inspection information
and the need to retain inspection reports was commented upon in our preceding
audit report. As noted above, BLLC revised its SOPs to address the conditions
and stated that the related procedures would be in place as of April 2020.
However, our procedural review and testing disclosed that documentation is not
always retained to support the inspections results or to support the review of
inspection information in the database as required by the SOPs.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BLLC comply with its established policies by
a. ensuring that a documented review of inspection information recorded
for accuracy and consistency is performed as required (repeat), and
b. retaining inspection reports to support the information recorded in the
inspection database (repeat).
Finding 3
BLLC did not conduct at least one annual routine inspection of each licensee.
Analysis
BLLC did not conduct annual routine inspections of each licensed establishment.
Although State law does not specify the frequency of required inspections, BLLC
management advised us that its goal for each of its over 1,100 licensees is to
annually conduct at least one comprehensive routine inspection to determine if the
establishment is open and operating in full compliance with the Alcoholic
Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City.
Based on our analysis of the inspection database for license year 2023, we
determined that 270 establishments did not have a routine inspection recorded in
the database for license year 2023. Routine inspections are more comprehensive
than the other inspections and would include, for example, a review to ensure the
establishment is properly purchasing its alcohol from a distributor, the bar is clean
and meets Baltimore City Health Department Standards, and the bathroom and
kitchen are clean and working.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BLLC ensure that all licensed establishments are
subject to an annual routine inspection.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for BLLC’s disciplinary process was to evaluate the disciplinary
procedures, BLLC’s compliance with applicable State laws, its enforcement of
applicable Board rules and regulations governing licensees, and its maintenance
of the related disciplinary records.
To accomplish this objective, we interviewed BLLC employees and reviewed the
Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City to determine the procedures over disciplinary
proceedings and the process that occurs when it is determined that a violation may
have occurred. We also observed two public Board hearings in which cases
resulting from licensee violations were adjudicated. Additionally, we performed
testing to evaluate whether the disciplinary process was properly administered and
documented. We also reviewed the monitoring of licensed establishments that
were closed or inactive for more than 180 days, as their license would expire by
law, to determine if the Board and BLLC took appropriate action.
Background
Disciplinary proceedings occur to adjudicate instances of licensee noncompliance
with State laws and the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board
of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City. Disciplinary proceedings
result from violations noted during licensee inspections, “311” complaint
inspections, and referrals received from the Baltimore Police Department and
other regulatory entities. Instances of licensee noncompliance are subject to
internal reviews prior to being sent to the Board for adjudication.
State law provides that the Board is charged with the duty of enforcing provisions
of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. The Board is responsible for adjudicating cases to determine if
violations have occurred and for setting the related penalties. The Board
generally holds hearings three times a month in public sessions to adjudicate these
cases, as well as to grant new licenses and license transfers. The hearings are
considered quasi-judicial and include testimony from inspectors, police, and
licensee representatives, including counsel. The Board will obtain other
information, as needed (such as the licensee’s violations history), prior to making
a decision and determining whether a penalty is appropriate. The “preponderance
of the evidence” standard is used to determine if the licensee has been found in
violation of the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of
Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City. Licensees may appeal the
decisions of the Board to the Circuit Court.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Licensees are provided the Board’s rulings verbally at the hearing and in writing
in a Penalty Assessment Notice if the ruling results in a penalty (fine, suspension,
or revocation). The Notice includes the amount of the penalty, and the amount of
time the licensee has to pay the fine (usually 30 days). If the licensee fails to pay
the fine within 30 days, the license will be physically removed by a BLLC
inspector.
The Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland includes penalty provisions for licensees found guilty of violating State
law and/or the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of
Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City.
 For any violation which is cause for suspension, the Board may, for a first
offense, impose a fine of not more than $500 or suspend the license or
both.
 For any subsequent offense, the Board may impose a fine of not more than
$3,000 or suspend the license or both.2
 For underage sales of alcohol, the Board may impose a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or suspend the license or both.
 The Board may revoke or suspend any license for any cause which, in the
judgment of the Board, is necessary to promote the peace or safety of the
community in which the place of business is situated.
 A license must be revoked or suspended under certain specific
circumstances (such as when a licensee makes a material false statement
in any application for a license or permit).
According to BLLC’s records, in fiscal year 2022 there were 95 fines assessed by
the Board totaling approximately $223,000. Figure 4 on the following page
reflects a summary of Board hearings for fiscal year 2022.
2 Effective July 1, 2023, Chapters 393 and 394, Laws of Maryland 2023 altered the maximum fine
for subsequent offenses to $20,000.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 4
Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City Hearings
Fiscal Year 2022
Number Number Percentage Percentage
Referral Source of of of of
Hearings Violations Hearings Violations
BLLC Inspectors 6 14 10% 15%
Comptroller of Maryland 1 2 2% 2%
Baltimore City Police Department (BCPD) &
49 65 78% 69%
BLLC
BCPD, BLLC, Baltimore City Fire Department
2 4 3% 4%
(BCFD), Health, and Housing
BLLC, BCPD, and Housing 1 3 2% 3%
BLLC, Housing, BCFD, Maryland Alcohol
2 2 3% 2%
and Tobacco Commission3
BLLC, Social Club Task Force 1 3 1% 3%
BCPD, BLLC, BCFD 1 2 1% 2%
TOTALS 63 95 100% 100%
Source: Board of Liquor License Commissioner for Balitmore City’s meeting minutes
Conclusion
Based on our review, BLLC has established adequate procedures over
disciplinary proceedings in compliance with State laws and its own rules and
regulations.
3 Effective May 3, 2023, Chapter 255, Laws of Maryland 2023 renamed the Alcohol and Tobacco
Commission as the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine if adequate oversight exists over BLLC
operations. To accomplish this objective, we reviewed Board approved SOPs,
interviewed BLLC employees, and reviewed and tested BLLC’s procedures with
respect to financial disclosures and potential conflicts of interest. Our review was
restricted to BLLC oversight of its operations and compliance with certain County
policies. Our review did not include an assessment of the appropriateness or
suitability (to achieve the stated purpose) of the County governance practices or
policies.
Conclusion
Although BLLC did develop an annual conflict of interest questionnaire to be
completed by its employees and commissioners to disclose secondary
employment and business investments, BLLC did not ensure that the
questionnaires were submitted. In this regard, no questionnaires were submitted
by any BLLC employee or commissioner for the most recent four-year period
reviewed.
Findings
Finding 4
BLLC did not obtain annual conflict of interest questionnaires from its
employees and commissioners as required by its policy.
Analysis
BLLC did not obtain annual conflict of interest questionnaires from its employees
and commissioners as required by its Financial Disclosure and Conflicts of
Interest Policy. Specifically, as of November 7, 2023, all 20 BLLC employees
and 3 commissioners had not filed a conflict of interest questionnaire for calendar
years 2020, 2021, and 2022. In addition, BLLC had not obtained conflict of
interest questionnaires for any employees for calendar years 2020 and 2021.4
According to BLLC’s Financial Disclosure and Conflicts of Interest Policy,
effective March 2020, between the months of April and May of each year, all
BLLC employees and commissioners are required to complete a conflict of
interest questionnaire. The Policy was established to ensure compliance with
requirements in State law that employees and commissioners do not have a direct
4 Our review disclosed BLLC employees complied with the State Ethics Commission requirement
to submit a standard annual financial disclosure form.
24

--- Page 27 ---
or indirect occupation, business, or investment interest in a premises where
alcoholic beverages are manufactured, distributed, or sold.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BLLC ensure that each employee and commissioner
annually complete the required conflict of interest questionnaire to identify
and report potential conflicts in the alcohol beverage industry specific to
BLLC’s law (repeat).
25

--- Page 28 ---
APPENDIX
Hon. Albert J. Matricciani, Jr. (Ret.)
Douglas K. Paige
Chairman
Executive Secretary
Commissioners
Michelle B. Wirzberger, Esq.
Edward L. Reisinger
Deputy Executive Secretary
Granville Templeton, III, Esq.
Staci L. Russell
ALTERNATE COMMISSIONER Assistant Executive
HARVEY E. JONES Secretary
State of Maryland
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
200 St. Paul Place, Suite 2300
Baltimore, Maryland 21202-5994
Phone: (410) 396-4377
September 6, 2024
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
301 West Camden Street
Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Mr. Tanen,
The Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City (BLLC) would like to thank the Office of
Legislative Audits (OLA) for conducting a performance audit of the BLLC as required by State
Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland for the operations conducted
by the agency for the 2018-2023 license years.
The OLA Audit of 2024 (Audit) shows that the agency showed “continual improvement in BLLC audit
results with the number of report findings” by the auditors.1 The success of such improvement is
reflected in the fact that the BLLC’s prior findings as identified in the OLA Audit of 2016 decreased from
24 to 4 within this report.
The BLLC reconstituted its operating policies and procedures, restructured personnel within its
inspection and administrative divisions, and instituted management practices to increase transparency
and compliance with the law and internal Standard Operating Procedures (SOP’s). However, the
Ransomware attack the city endured in 2019 and the COVID-19 pandemic that enforced several
Executive Orders from both the Governor of Maryland and the Mayor of Baltimore City created
obstacles that the BLLC had to create solutions, not only to ensure the safety of employees, but the
compliance of licensees per the Executive Order. This did hinder some operations that were previously
in place, but after the pandemic restrictions were lifted, the BLLC resumed normal operations set forth
by the SOP’s.
The BLLC agrees with the overall sentiment of this Audit. With the BLLC’s current SOP’s and makeup of
staff, the BLLC will be able to accomplish the goals to ensure repeated findings are addressed. In
1 Letter to the Joint Audit Committee written by Legislative Auditor Mr. Brian S. Tanen. Page 2.

--- Page 29 ---
addition to the SOP’s, the BLLC will continue to conduct weekly InspectionStat, DocketStat, and
AccountingStat meetings to ensure staff adheres to the policies and procedures the BLLC has in place.
Lastly, I would like to thank my fellow Commissioners, the Executive Secretary, Deputy Executive
Secretary, and all other members of the BLLC staff for their hard work in helping to accomplish the
significant structural and operational changes necessary to address the findings from prior OLA audits.
The BLLC can accomplish our goals and mission with the realignment of our inspections division and
administrative division, and continued upgrades to technology.
If you have any questions or concerns regarding our submission, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Albert J. Matricciani, Jr.
Albert J. Matricciani, Jr.
Chairman
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
For Baltimore City

--- Page 30 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Objective 1 - Licensing
Finding 1
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs for processing and controlling
collections.
We recommend that BLLC follow its SOPs for processing and controlling
cash receipts. Specifically, BLLC should ensure deposit reconciliations are
performed and voided transactions are reviewed by an employee without
access to collections using original source documentation (repeat).
We advised BLLC how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The new licensing system, once implemented, will provide different
additional comments as levels of user access to perform specific functions related to the
deemed necessary. employees’ duties
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2024
Please provide details of The BLLC is ensuring that Administrative staff are restrictively
corrective action or endorsing checks once received. Administrative staff may request a
explain disagreement. void for receipts they have inputted, but the Accountant is the only
staff member who will process the void request. The Accountant will
continue to provide checks and balances between their deposit form
and reports complied from the Director of Finance.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 31 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Objective 2 – Inspections
Finding 2
BLLC did not ensure information in the inspection database was entered
accurately and did not always retain inspection reports to support the
information recorded.
We recommend that BLLC comply with its established policies by
a. ensuring that a documented review of inspection information recorded
for accuracy and consistency is performed as required (repeat), and
b. retaining inspection reports to support the information recorded in the
inspection database (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Upon implementation of the new licensing system with the inspection
additional comments as segment, inspections will be completed in real time on a tablet and will
deemed necessary. not require a yellow sheet for the purpose of recording later.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/2024
Please provide details of Chief Inspector is providing supervisory oversight to ensure
corrective action or independent reviews of inspection information has been completed
explain disagreement. as required by the BLLC SOP with random compliance checks of
physical reports against the electronic report within SharePoint.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2024
Please provide details of After the review of the Chief Inspector, inspection reports will be
corrective action or provided to the Administrative staff for filing in the appropriate file.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 32 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
BLLC’s did not conduct at least one annual routine inspection of each
licensee.
We recommend that BLLC ensure that all licensed establishments are
subject to an annual routine inspection.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/1/2024
Please provide details of The BLLC realigned the Inspection Division and inspection
corrective action or assignments to ensure better accountability and equal responsibility
explain disagreement. pertaining to the number of licenses they are required to inspect on
a quarterly basis. District maps and spreadsheets were created
internally to provide easier location access and tracking their
progress within their assigned area. The data is closely monitored by
the Chief Inspector and Deputy Executive Secretary and progress
reports are disseminated during weekly meetings to ensure
productivity on meeting required tasks.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 33 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Finding 4
BLLC did not obtain annual conflict of interest questionnaires from its
employees and commissioners as required by its policy.
We recommend that BLLC ensure that each employee and commissioner
annually complete the required conflict of interest questionnaire to identify
and report potential conflicts in the alcohol beverage industry specific to
BLLC’s law (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The BLLC is and has been 100% compliant with the State Ethics
additional comments as Commission for the annual financial disclosure form submission that is
deemed necessary. due by April 30th of each year, however the agency failed to complete
the internal conflict of interest question stated within the SOP’s.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/2024
Please provide details of The Deputy Executive Secretary followed-up with each employee
corrective action or and received answers to the BLLC’s conflict of interest question for
explain disagreement. the years 2021, 2022, and 2023 from all employees and
commissioners. The BLLC conflict of interest question will be
disseminated alongside the State Ethics annual financial disclosure
form and is also due by April 30th of each year.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 34 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Marcus J. Cheese
Timothy Moon
Staff Auditors