Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Central Operations
Date: 09/17/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66eaea1e423fd75abe761461
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:10:08.807100
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
September 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 17, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the central operations of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) for the period
beginning April 1, 2018 and ending May 31, 2022. Through its correctional
institutions and parole and probation programs, DPSCS has statewide
responsibility for the supervision and rehabilitation of incarcerated individuals
and paroled individuals. DPSCS also sets standards for criminal justice training
and operates criminal justice information systems. During the audit period
DPSCS had a significant vacancy rate, which may have contributed, at least in
part, to the findings in this report, including several that were repeats from our
preceding audit report.
Our audit disclosed that certain employees who separated from DPSCS were not
removed from the payroll timely resulting in improper payments to these former
employees totaling approximately $173,000. In addition, DPSCS did not
establish adequate controls to ensure the propriety of manually processed
adjustments to employee pay and leave balances.
Our audit also disclosed that DPSCS did not consolidate procurements of certain
goods and services circumventing certain oversight and limiting its leverage as a
high-volume purchaser. Furthermore, DPSCS did not always publish contract
awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage, as required by State procurement
regulations.
Finally, we noted significant concerns with the procurement and monitoring of
contracts related to the healthcare delivery system that provides comprehensive
primary, secondary, specialty health, and hospitalization services to the pretrial

--- Page 4 ---
and resident populations of DPSCS. As a result, we expanded the scope of our
review and the results will be issued in a separate audit report.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of three of the six
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that DPSCS did
not satisfactorily address these three findings, which are repeated in this report.
Two of the remaining findings will be addressed in the next Comptroller of
Maryland – Office of the Comptroller audit due to an organizational change
further described below. The status of the finding related to health contracts for
incarcerated individuals will be addressed in the above noted separate audit
report.
DPSCS’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations. Subsequent
to the response receipt, but prior to the issuance of the final report, we contacted
DPSCS and obtained clarification that satisfactorily resolved all outstanding
questions and issues. Consequently, we have concluded that the written responses
and clarification together indicate that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DPSCS and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational Change 6
Health Services Contracts 6
Former Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) 7
Management Employee Convicted of Bribery Related to COVID-19
Procurements
United States Department of Labor Investigations of Alleged Failure to 8
Pay Overtime and Subsequent Payments
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Payroll
Finding 1 – DPSCS did not ensure employees who were separated from 10
DPSCS were removed timely from the payroll resulting in improper
payments to former employees totaling at least $173,000.
* Finding 2 – DPSCS did not establish adequate controls to ensure the 11
propriety of manually processed adjustments to employee pay and
leave balances.
Procurement
* Finding 3 – DPSCS did not consolidate procurements of certain goods 13
and services circumventing certain oversight and limiting its
leverage as a high-volume purchaser.
* Finding 4 – DPSCS did not always publish contract awards as required 15
by State procurement regulations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Through its correctional institutions and parole and probation programs, the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has statewide
responsibility for the supervision and rehabilitation of incarcerated and paroled
individuals. DPSCS also sets standards for criminal justice training and operates
criminal justice information systems. This audit covered DPSCS Central
Operations, including:
(1) the Office of the Secretary, which provides overall executive direction and
coordination for the activities of DPSCS operating units;
(2) the three main DPSCS functional divisions – Correction, Parole and
Probation, and Pretrial Detention and Services; and
(3) the Patuxent Institution.
The scope of this audit included activities of these units and certain support
services performed by these units on behalf of other DPSCS units including
payroll processed within the State Personnel System, disbursements and
procurement transactions, corporate purchasing card activity, equipment, certain
controls over information systems, and all non-incarcerated individual collections.
As noted elsewhere, this audit does not include DPSCS’ monitoring of the
incarcerated individual health system or related contracts. Due to the concerns
noted with those operations a separate report will be issued at a later date.
We conduct separate audits of DPSCS Central Operations, DPSCS Regional
Operations, DPSCS Information Technology and Communications Division
(ITCD), and Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE). As such, certain
financial activities of DPSCS’ five regional fiscal offices on behalf of detention
and correctional facilities were subject to audit during the DPSCS Regional
Operations audit, including incarcerated individual cash receipts, incarcerated
individual funds, and the biometric timekeeping system used by correctional
officers. In addition, activities associated with DPSCS’ computer and network
operations are subject to audit during the DPSCS-ITCD audit, and the major
financial-related areas of operations, such as purchasing and disbursements, of the
MCE are subject to audit during that respective audit.
As noted in Figure 1 on the following page, according to the State’s records,
during fiscal year 2022, expenditures for the budgetary units audited (see
comments below) totaled approximately $1.4 billion. Personnel costs accounted
for the majority of these expenditures. During the period December 31, 2019
4

--- Page 7 ---
through June 30, 2022, DPSCS had vacancy rates that ranged from 13.7 percent to
21.5 percent. As of June 30, 2022, approximately 15 percent of the total 9,192
positions were vacant. These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to
the findings in this report.
Figure 1
DPSCS Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 7,805 84.9%
Frozen1 8 0.1%
Vacant 1,379 15.0%
Total 9,192
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe
Benefits $985,642,487 68.3%
Technical and Special Fees 7,728,342 0.5%
Operating Expenses 449,908,471 31.2%
Total $1,443,279,300
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $951,493,711 65.9%
Special Fund 69,720,047 4.8%
Federal 413,385,176 28.7%
Reimbursable Fund 8,680,366 0.6%
Total $1,443,279,300
Source: State financial records and DPSCS personnel records
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Agencies
were not authorized to fill frozen positions according to budgetary instructions from the
Department of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not
been filled since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Organizational Change
Chapter 287, Laws of Maryland 2021, effective October 1, 2021, transferred the
Maryland 9-1-1 Board and related responsibilities and assets from DPSCS to the
Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM). The 9-1-1 Trust
Fund included revenue from State and local fees, and a fee charged on prepaid
wireless services (as well as investment earnings on the fund). Furthermore,
Chapter 605, Laws of Maryland 2020, effective May 8, 2020, require the
Comptroller of Maryland (COM), in consultation with the Board, to adopt
procedures for auditing surcharge collections and remittance by telephone
companies and commercial mobile radio service providers of 9-1-1 fees collected.
In addition, the law authorizes the Comptroller to compel compliance with a
related audit. Activities from April 1, 2018 until the transfer of auditing authority
of the Fund to the COM are included in the scope of this audit.
Health Services Contracts
DPSCS is responsible for a healthcare delivery system that provides
comprehensive primary, secondary, specialty health, and hospitalization services
to the pretrial and resident populations of DPSCS. The healthcare delivery
system includes medical, mental health, pharmaceutical, and dental services that
were provided through four contracts with contract award amounts originally
totaling approximately $1.15 billion. In December 2023, DPSCS processed no-
cost contract modifications for both the Medical and Mental Health contracts
extending the contracts through March 2024. In March 2024, DPSCS requested
additional contract modifications to allow sufficient time to complete new
procurements for these contracts. These modifications were approved by the
Board of Public Works and executed in May 2024 (see Figure 2 on page 7).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
Incarcerated Individual Health Care Contracts
($ in millions)
Original Original Contract Modified Total Payments
Type Contract Contract Modifica Contract Contract as of June
Term Amount tions Term Amount 30, 2024
January 2019 - January 2024 -
Medical December 2023 $680.0 $160.0 December 2024 $840.0 $732.7
January 2018 - January 2024 -
Mental Health December 2023 155.6 26.4 December 2024 182.0 157.3
January 2020 -
Pharmaceutical December 2024 250.0 - 250.0 161.5
January 2022 -
Dental January 2027 67.6 - 67.6 29.1
Totals $1,153.2 $186.4 $1,339.6 $1,080.6
Source: DPSCS records
DPSCS has a long history of issues with these contracts dating back to February
2007 that have been addressed in OLA’s routine fiscal compliance audits, a
special review, and a performance audit. During our current audit we noted
significant concerns with the procurement and monitoring of these contracts. As
a result, we expanded the scope of our review and the results will be issued in a
separate audit report.
Former DPSCS Management Employee Convicted of Bribery
Related to COVID-19 Procurements
During our audit, we received an allegation regarding a former DPSCS
management employee that was under investigation by the Office of the Attorney
General’s (OAG’s) Criminal Division. Due to the ongoing investigation, we did
not pursue this allegation. On October 23, 2023, the Criminal Division reported
that the former employee was convicted of bribery related to the procurement of
personal protective equipment (PPE) during the COVID-19 pandemic, that
according to State records totaled $25.7 million.
According to the OAG’s press release, the former employee favored a company
associated with the employee’s sibling, and on at least two occasions, declined
offers from vendors with lower prices for the same products. In addition, the
7

--- Page 10 ---
sibling’s company paid a $3 million kickback to the former employee that was
used to fund the employee’s personal investment account and a $278,540 boat.
The former employee and the sibling were each sentenced to 10 years in prison,
with all but one year and one day suspended, followed by three years of
supervised probation. Assets seized by the State from the former employee and
sibling totaled approximately $2.6 million, and the former employee was ordered
to pay an additional $1.2 million in restitution, less the proceeds from the sale of
the boat.
While we did not review these particular procurements and payments due to the
ongoing investigation, we did identify other deficiencies with DPSCS
procurement procedures. As further addressed below, these deficiencies impaired
the transparency and oversight of procurements during the audit period.
United States Department of Labor (US DOL) Investigations of
Alleged Failure to Pay Overtime
In November 2020, the US DOL initiated an investigation regarding DPSCS’
Jessup Correctional Institution (JCI) allegedly not paying overtime for employees
who worked past the scheduled end of their shift. As a result of the investigation,
in December 2021, DPSCS agreed to pay US DOL $468,000, which would then
disburse the funds to the 343 affected employees. In March 2022, the US DOL
expanded its initial investigation to include all DPSCS correctional institutions
and as a result, in July 2023, DPSCS paid $13 million to the US DOL to resolve
similar additional claims affecting 3,874 employees. Finally, in March 2024,
DPSCS paid the US DOL $9.5 million to resolve all claims related to additional
US DOL investigations.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of 3 of the 6 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated November 20, 2019. As disclosed
in Figure 3 on the following page, we determined that these findings are repeated
in this report. We did not follow up on three findings in our preceding audit
report. Two findings related to the administration of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund; the
status of these findings will be addressed in the next Comptroller of Maryland –
Office of the Comptroller audit. The status of the remaining finding related to
health contracts for incarcerated individuals will be addressed in the above noted
separate audit report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Adequate controls had not been established to ensure the propriety of Repeated
Finding 1
payroll, including adjustments to employee pay. (Current Finding 2)
DPSCS made repeated purchases of fresh produce and maintenance
Repeated
Finding 3 services without consolidating and appropriately soliciting
(Current Finding 3)
competitive bids and executing written contracts.
DPSCS did not always publish contract awards, as required by State
Repeated
Finding 4 procurement regulations, and artificially split certain purchases made
(Current Finding 4)
with purchasing cards to avoid soliciting vendor bids.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Payroll
Background
DPSCS uses a biometric timekeeping system in all of its detention facilities that
requires employees to scan their fingerprints into the timekeeping system each
day to record “in” and “out” times. As of June 30, 2022, there were 6,709
authorized positions at regional detention facilities which utilized a biometric
timekeeping system. The remaining 2,483 DPSCS employees who were not
located in detention facilities enter time worked directly into the Statewide
Personnel System (SPS). At the end of each pay period, the DPSCS Payroll
Department transfers all approved time entries from the biometric timekeeping
system into SPS and processes payroll for the entire agency. According to State
records, during fiscal year 2022 DPSCS payroll expenditures totaled
approximately $985.6 million.
Finding 1
DPSCS did not ensure employees who separated from DPSCS were removed
timely from the payroll resulting in improper payments to former employees
totaling at least $173,000.
Analysis
DPSCS did not ensure employees who separated from DPSCS were removed
timely from the payroll, resulting in improper payments totaling at least $173,000
made to former employees. SPS automatically generates payments to every
active employee unless adjustments are made to deactivate the employee or
reduce the amount paid (such as for employees on leave without pay). Our
review disclosed that one employee was solely responsible for entering separation
dates in SPS without any independent supervisory review and approval. As a
result, delays and errors in entering information were not readily detected.
Our review of DPSCS employee records identified 3,996 employee separations
from DPSCS between July 1, 2017 and July 20, 2022 of which 154 employees
were still active in SPS from 10 to 860 days after their separation date. Our test
of disbursements to seven of these employees disclosed payments totaling
$173,000 that were improper. For example, the last day of work for one
employee was recorded in SPS as August 5, 2016; however, the termination date
was recorded as October 12, 2016 more than two months later. Furthermore, this
transaction was not recorded in SPS until June 7, 2018 resulting in the employee
continuing to be paid and related improper payments totaling approximately
10

--- Page 13 ---
$58,300. DPSCS was not aware of the improper payments to these employees
until we brought the matter to their attention.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPSCS
a. perform an independent supervisory review to ensure the accuracy of
termination dates entered into SPS and establish appropriate procedures
to monitor the timeliness of postings to SPS, and
b. investigate payments to employees after the separation date including
those noted above and pursue recovery of any improper payments.
Finding 2
DPSCS did not establish adequate controls to ensure the propriety of
manually processed adjustments to employee pay and leave balances.
Analysis
DPSCS did not establish adequate controls to ensure the propriety of manually
processed adjustments to employee pay and leave balances. During the audit
period (April 1, 2018 through May 31, 2022), DPSCS processed 23,243 manual
payroll adjustments, such as pay related to military leave and retroactive payroll
payments, which increased employee pay by approximately $4.2 million. During
this period, DPSCS also processed 21,072 leave adjustments, such as leave bank
donations, which resulted in a net increase to employee leave balances of 230,669
hours.
Each pay period, a DPSCS employee manually prepared a listing of payroll
adjustments and submitted it to the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM) for processing in SPS. The listing was prepared from individual
adjustment forms that were approved by the respective employees’ supervisors.
Leave balance adjustments were processed directly in SPS by one of thirty
DPSCS employees.
Our review disclosed that DPSCS did not have an independent documented
review and approval of the payroll and leave adjustments. Specifically, for
payroll adjustments, there was no review prior to submission to DBM, and for
leave adjustments there was no independent review of the propriety of the
adjustments. DPSCS also did not use available system output reports of all
payroll and leave adjustments recorded in SPS or perform any other verification
to ensure that only authorized adjustments had been processed.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Our test of 23 manual adjustments identified 7 employees who were granted
military administrative leave between August 2015 and September 2022, for
which we determined that DPSCS overpaid four employees and lacked required
support for three others. For example, two employees were paid $84,557 because
the manual adjustments paid them their full State salary, instead of the difference
between their active duty base salary and their State salary as required.
Documentation was not readily available to determine the amount these
employees were overpaid. For three other employees, DPSCS did not have
approved military orders to support adjustments for military leave payments
totaling $60,108. Due to the lack of supervisory review of manual adjustments,
DPSCS was not aware of these issues until we brought them to its attention.
A similar condition regarding the review of employee pay and leave adjustments
was noted in our prior audit report. In response to that report, DPSCS agreed with
our findings and indicated that procedures would be in place by December 2019
to ensure manually prepared listings of payroll adjustments would be approved by
independent supervisory personnel and that SPS output reports of payroll and
leave balance adjustments would be independently verified. However, we were
advised that these procedures were not implemented because of staffing
limitations.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that manually prepared listings of payroll adjustments are
reviewed and approved by independent supervisory personnel, and that
this approval is documented, before the listings are submitted to DBM for
processing (repeat);
b. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance
adjustments to ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed,
at least on a test basis (repeat);
c. maintain documentation supporting the calculation of pay adjustments,
such as military leave, for independent supervisory review; and
d. take appropriate action to recover any overpayments, including those
noted above.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Procurements
Finding 3
DPSCS did not consolidate procurements of certain goods and services
circumventing certain oversight and transparency requirements and limiting
its leverage as a high-volume purchaser.
Analysis
DPSCS did not consolidate procurements of kitchen and public safety equipment
and certain maintenance services totaling $5.4 million circumventing certain
oversight and transparency requirements and limiting its leverage as a high-
volume purchaser. Our review of purchasing and payment activity during the
period from April 2018 through May 2022, disclosed that DPSCS issued 1,051
purchase orders totaling approximately $4.3 million to nine vendors, without a
formal competitive procurement process. DPSCS made payments totaling $3.8
million on these purchase orders and an additional 689 payments totaling $1.6
million to these vendors that were not associated with the purchase orders as
detailed in Figure 4 on page 14.
DPSCS could not readily justify why the goods and services procured from these
vendors were not consolidated to maximize its leverage as a high-volume
purchaser. Furthermore, because these contracts were not consolidated, certain of
the contracts were not subject to enhanced oversight (such as control agency and
Board of Public Works (BPW) approval) and enhanced controls and transparency
required of higher cost contracts (such as competitive sealed bidding and public
notice of contract solicitation and related award).
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 4
Vendor Purchasing Activity
April 1, 2018 through May 31, 2022
Purchase Orders
Direct
Vendor Type of Purchase Total Paid
Number Total Value Payments Payments*
1 Kitchen equipment 159 $ 342,200 $ 273,900 $ 41,100 $ 315,000
2 Kitchen equipment 76 446,600 366,200 545,500 911,700
Public safety
3 equipment 154 787,400 741,700 189,800 931,500
Public safety
4 equipment 156 590,200 461,500 134,200 595,700
5 Maintenance services 139 789,800 710,800 520,500 1,231,300
6 Maintenance services 130 449,900 366,800 33,100 399,900
7 Maintenance services 128 554,300 535,600 4,800 540,400
8 Maintenance services 100 287,800 259,900 57,400 317,300
9 Maintenance services 9 97,400 97,300 100,500 197,800
1,051 $ 4,345,600 $ 3,813,700 $ 1,626,900 $ 5,440,600
Source: State financial records
* Direct payments are not associated with purchase orders, such as direct voucher payments and corporate purchasing card payments.
Our review of purchasing and payment activity for these vendors disclosed that
DPSCS had a pattern of not consolidating its own procurements. Rather, it split
purchases into multiple purchase orders, made direct payments not associated
with purchase orders such as direct voucher payments, and made corporate
purchasing card payments (see Figure 4 above). Generally, each of these
purchase orders and payments were in amounts below its delegated purchase limit
of $100,000.
We further noted that certain other procurements (not included in the figure
above) appeared to have been artificially split. Specifically, our test of 10
disbursements totaling $44,000 from five vendors between June 2019 and March
2022, disclosed that 6 purchases totaling $25,486 from three of these vendors had
been artificially split. Splitting these purchases allowed DPSCS to avoid the
requirement to solicit competitive bids.
A similar condition regarding not consolidating procurement of maintenance
services was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its response,
14

--- Page 17 ---
DPSCS indicated that it would coordinate with the Department of General
Services (DGS) to confirm the most appropriate procurement method for the
referenced services and that it would execute written contracts, as applicable, by
June 30, 2020. Furthermore, DPSCS indicated that it would review purchasing
activity to ensure that competitive bids would be obtained when applicable.
DPSCS could not explain why these steps were not implemented.
State procurement regulations prohibit procurements from being artificially
divided to circumvent procurement requirements, and for vendor bids to be
obtained for purchases of $5,000 or more. Regulations also generally provide that
solicitations and award of contracts for goods of $50,000 or more be posted on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA2) and obtain DGS approval,3 and that
contracts for maintenance services of $200,000 or more obtain DGS and BPW
approval.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPSCS comply with State procurement regulations to
enhance oversight and transparency and maximize its leverage as a high-
volume purchaser. Specifically, we recommend that DPSCS
a. work with DGS, if necessary, to competitively procure equipment and
maintenance services in a manner that meets DPSCS’ needs and ensures
these goods and services are obtained at the best value (repeat);
b. ensure that control agency approvals are obtained, as needed (repeat);
and
c. refrain from the practice of artificially splitting purchases and solicit
competitive bids, as required.
Finding 4
DPSCS did not always publish contract awards as required by State
procurement regulations.
Analysis
DPSCS did not always publish contract awards as required by State procurement
regulations. Our test of 10 contracts effective between June 2019 and April 2022
and totaling $249 million, disclosed that for 9 contracts totaling $248.2 million
DPSCS did not publish the awards on eMMA as required. As of December 28,
2 eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) is an internet-based, interactive procurement system
managed by the Department of General Services. Effective July 2019, DGS replaced eMaryland
Marketplace with eMMA.
3 Effective October 2023, the maximum dollar limit for small procurements increased from
$50,000 to $100,000, except for DGS and Maryland Department of Transportation construction
contracts where the limit increased to $200,000.
15

--- Page 18 ---
2022, six contracts effective between June 2019 and December 2020 totaling $35
million had not been published for periods ranging from 9 to 41 months after the
contract effective date. The remaining three contracts effective between January
2022 and March 2022 totaling $213.3 million were published between 6 and 10
months after the contract effective date.
State regulations require that contract awards greater than $50,000 be published
on eMMA not more than 30 days after the execution and approval of the contract.3
Publishing awards provides transparency regarding winning bidders and award
amounts.
A similar condition regarding the publication of contract awards on eMMA was
noted in our prior report. In response to that report, DPSCS indicated that it
would immediately take steps to ensure that all applicable contract awards were
properly published as of November 2019. We were advised by DPSCS that it had
not implemented the recommendation because of staff turnover.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPSCS publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage as required (repeat).
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) Central Operations for the period beginning
April 1, 2018 through May 31, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DPSCS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements (including
certain purchasing activities of the DPSCS Regional fiscal offices), payroll,
equipment, and background investigations. Our audit also included certain
support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records
and related fiscal functions) provided by the DPSCS – Office of the Secretary on
a centralized basis for the Regional offices. We also determined the status of
three of the six findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of the procurement and monitoring of
health care services contracts administered by DPSCS, which will be addressed in
a subsequent audit report. In addition, our audit did not include the computer
operations of the DPSCS Information and Technology and Communications
Division and the Maryland Correctional Enterprises, which are audited separately.
Our audit also did not include incarcerated individual cash receipts, incarcerated
individual funds, other earnings and overtime payments related to the Division of
Correction employees, and usage of a biometric timekeeping system by
correctional officers; these activities are audited during our DPSCS regional
operations audit.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 1, 2018 to May 31, 2022, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
17

--- Page 20 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the DPSCS’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from certain modules of DPSCS’s background investigation system for the
purpose of testing the timeliness of applications processing and investigations.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data was
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DPSCS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DPSCS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
18

--- Page 21 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DPSCS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DPSCS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The DPSCS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DPSCS regarding the
results of our review of its response.
19

--- Page 22 ---
APPENDIX
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
6776 Reisterstown Road, Baltimore, Maryland 21215
410-585-3346 – TOLL FREE 877-379-8636 • www.dpscs.maryland.gov
STATE OF MARYLAND September 12, 2024
WES MOORE
GOVERNOR
ARUNA MILLER
LT. GOVERNOR
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
CAROLYN J. SCRUGGS
Legislative Auditor
SECRETARY
Office of Legislative Audits
ANTHONY A. GASKINS
CHIEF OF STAFF Department of Legislative Services
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
JOSEPH SEDTAL
DEPUTY SECRETARY 351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
ADMINISTRATION
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
ANNIE D. HARVEY
DEPUTY SECRETARY
OPERATIONS
Dear Mr. Tanen:
ANGELINA GUARINO
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
DATA, POLICY AND GRANTS
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has reviewed
RENARD E. BROOKS
ASSISTANT SECRETARY the Draft Audit Report dated August 2024 for the DPSCS – Central Operations. We
PROGRAMS, TREATMENT & RE-
ENTRY SERVICES appreciate the constructive findings and recommendations that were made as the result
of this audit.
Please find attached the Department’s itemized responses to the findings and
recommendations. Corrective action has or will be taken for all the findings identified
in your audit, and the Office of the Inspector General will conduct periodic follow up
audits to monitor the status of compliance.
If you have any questions regarding this response, please contact me.
Sincerely,
Carolyn J. Scruggs
Secretary
Attachment
Copy: Adam Flasch, Deputy Chief of Staff for Public Safety and Homeland Security

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 1
DPSCS did not ensure employees who separated from DPSCS were removed
timely from the payroll resulting in improper payments to former employees
totaling at least $173,000.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. perform an independent supervisory review to ensure the accuracy of
termination dates entered into SPS and establish appropriate procedures
to monitor the timeliness of postings to SPS, and
b. investigate payments to employees after the separation date including
those noted above and pursue recovery of any improper payments.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/24 and
ongoing
Please provide details of An independent supervisory review of termination dates is currently
corrective action or being done to ensure the accuracy of termination dates entered into SPS.
explain disagreement. Employees with the Human Resource Coordinator role (HRC) initiate
the transactions and a Human Resource Partner (HRP) approves the
transactions. HR will establish a procedure to monitor the timeliness of
postings to SPS.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/15/2022
and ongoing
Please provide details of Payroll will investigate payments to employees after the separation date,
corrective action or including those noted above and pursue recovery of any improper
explain disagreement. payments.
DBM has also begun providing backdated termination reports to review
so future instances can be caught before overpayment happens.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DPSCS did not establish adequate controls to ensure the propriety of
manually processed adjustments to employee pay and leave balances.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that manually prepared listings of payroll adjustments are
reviewed and approved by independent supervisory personnel, and that
this approval is documented, before the listings are submitted to DBM for
processing (repeat);
b. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance
adjustments to ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed,
at least on a test basis (repeat)
c. maintain documentation supporting the calculation of pay adjustments,
such as military leave, for independent supervisory review; and
d. take appropriate action to recover any overpayments, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/15/2022
and ongoing
Please provide details of We will ensure that manually prepared listings of payroll adjustments
corrective action or are reviewed and approved by independent supervisory personnel, and
explain disagreement. that this approval is documented, before the listings are submitted to
DBM for processing.
This review already occurs and is documented based on documentation
required by DBM via the Input Audit Checklist for all manual pay
adjustments that we may request.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/15/2022
and ongoing
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of On a test basis, we will independently verify SPS output reports of
corrective action or payroll and leave balance adjustments to ensure only authorized
explain disagreement. adjustments had been processed.
This review of the reports is also included in the review of the Input
Audit Checklist. However, leave balance adjustments are separate and
reviewed on a test basis for backup documentation that is kept on file
within the payroll shared drives.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/15/2022
and ongoing
Please provide details of Payroll will maintain documentation supporting the calculation of pay
corrective action or adjustments, such as the application of military leave, for independent
explain disagreement. supervisory review.
Adjustments that payroll takes part in are fully documented, such as
those processed on input. However, military leave is not a payroll
function; it is specifically processed by Human Resources with no
review by payroll.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/15/2022
and ongoing
Please provide details of Should it be determined that there are any overpayments, DPSCS will
corrective action or correct the records and take necessary action to recover the
explain disagreement. overpayments.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Procurements
Finding 3
DPSCS did not consolidate procurements of certain goods and services
circumventing certain oversight and transparency requirements and limiting
its leverage as a high-volume purchaser.
We recommend that DPSCS comply with State procurement regulations to
enhance oversight and transparency and maximize its leverage as a high-
volume purchaser. Specifically, we recommend that DPSCS
a. work with DGS, if necessary, to competitively procure equipment and
maintenance services in a manner that meets DPSCS’ needs and ensures
these goods and services are obtained at the best value (repeat);
b. ensure that control agency approvals are obtained, as needed (repeat);
and
c. refrain from the practice of artificially splitting purchases and solicit
competitive bids, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/15/2022 and
Ongoing
Please provide details of The Office of Procurement Services will continue to work with DGS, as
corrective action or necessary, to competitively procure equipment and maintenance services
explain disagreement. in a manner that meets DPSCS’ needs and ensures these goods and
services are obtained at the best value.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/15/2022 and
Ongoing
Please provide details of The Office of Procurement Services will ensure that control agency
corrective action or approvals are obtained, as needed.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/15/2022 and
Ongoing
Please provide details of We will refrain from the practice of artificially splitting purchases and
corrective action or solicit competitive bids, as required. The Office of Procurement Services
explain disagreement. understands that split purchases are prohibited. Supervisors and
procurement officers are reminded during weekly staff meetings that
split purchasing is not allowed. On October 31, 2023, a statement was
issued to the Commodities Unit asking Procurement Officers to combine
requisitions if similar work is being performed in a different location at
the same facility. When split purchases are caught, the Procurement
Officer assigned to the requisition will ask the end user if the
requisitions can be combined to avoid split purchasing, and will also
notify the end user that artificially splitting purchases are prohibited and
illegal according to COMAR.
In addition, the Quality Assurance and Quality Control (QAQC) Unit
within the Procurement Division reviews and audits purchases to ensure
end users are not artificially splitting purchases. The audit consists of
reviewing data from CPC and FMIS reports to determine if end users are
submitting similar requisition requests within 30 days of each other.
QAQC Unit also plans to create training sessions for end users to
prevent split purchasing from occurring.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 28 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
DPSCS did not always publish contract awards as required by State
procurement regulations.
We recommend that DPSCS publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage as required (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/15/2022 and
Ongoing
Please provide details of We will publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
corrective action or as required. The Office of Procurement Services QAQC Unit conducts
explain disagreement. audits on a bi-weekly basis to ensure contract awards are appropriately
posted on eMMA. If contract awards are not posted within 30 days, the
QAQC Unit notifies the Procurement Officer, their supervisor, Deputy
Director and Executive Director of Procurement for subsequent follow
up.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Thea A. Chimento, CFE
Mya N. Cofield
Mariyum Gill
Albert S. Kim
Dianne P. Ramirez
Brian M. Webbert
Staff Auditors