Title: State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Date: 09/27/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=66fd8534631ccd09c1605d27
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:10:52.004207
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
September 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 27, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation (DAT) for the period beginning March 25, 2019 and
ending August 31, 2022. DAT is responsible for administering the State’s real
and personal property tax laws, including various programs that provide property
tax credits to homeowners and renters, as well as for administering various
functions applicable to corporations.
Our audit disclosed that DAT was not reviewing the results of routine data
matches that were conducted to help identify potential changes in property
ownership and improper homestead property tax credits (HPTC). In addition,
matching procedures using independent records of rental properties had not been
implemented by DAT to help identify rental properties with improper HPTCs.
Our review of both the match results and certain rental records we obtained
disclosed homeowners who were receiving improper HPTCs.
We also found that determinations of HPTC eligibility for certain properties
remained in pending status, neither denied nor approved, for extended periods
without timely investigation and resolution. In addition, DAT did not have formal
procedures to inform local taxing authorities when it determined property owners
were receiving an HPTC for an ineligible property so the taxing authorities could
assess any taxes due.
Our audit also disclosed that DAT was several years behind in performing audits
of homeowners’ tax credits (HTCs). DAT also did not ensure that local
jurisdictions recovered and remitted all HTCs from homeowners who had
transferred their properties, and did not record or timely deposit the recovered

--- Page 4 ---
HTCs. DAT also did not take sufficient action to return $786,000 in taxes due to
homeowners because of adjustments to their HTCs.
In addition, DAT did not review information available from the Comptroller of
Maryland, such as entities receiving payments from the State and/or entities with
active sales tax accounts, to help identify businesses that failed to register with
DAT and file personal property returns as required. DAT also did not obtain
adequate documentation to verify the propriety of charges related to technology
enterprise services received from the Department of Information Technology
valued at $7.7 million over a four year period.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that DAT satisfactorily addressed six of those eight
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
DAT’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while DAT
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we have identified
certain instances in which statements in the response conflict with the report
findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation,
and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor comments” within
DAT’s response to explain our position. However, consistent with the
requirements of State law, we have redacted the elements of DAT’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding
issues that we cannot resolve with DAT. Additionally, although DAT’s response
indicated agreement, certain actions indicated by DAT may be insufficient to
2

--- Page 5 ---
comprehensively address all the audit issues. These responses will require further
clarification, but we do not anticipate that these instances will require the
Committee’s attention to resolve. Finally, we have edited DAT’s response to
remove certain vendor names or products, as allowed by our policy.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DAT
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Real Property Reassessment Notices 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 11
Homestead Property Tax Credits (HPTC)
Finding 1 – The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) 12
was not reviewing the results of certain data matches that identified
potential changes in property ownership and improper HPTC’s, and
was not using independent records of rental properties to identify
and investigate potentially improper credits. Our review of both the
match results and certain rental property records disclosed property
owners who were receiving improper credits.
Finding 2 – Determination of HPTC eligibility for numerous properties 14
remained in pending status for extended periods without timely
investigation and resolution, resulting in HPTCs being applied to
potentially ineligible properties.
Finding 3 – DAT did not have formal procedures to notify local 15
taxing authorities of ineligible HPTC recipients so that they could
assess any property taxes due in accordance with State law.
Homeowners’ Tax Credits (HTC)
* Finding 4 – DAT did not perform timely audits of HTC applications 16
and did not ensure local jurisdictions recovered and remitted HTCs
from homeowners that transferred their properties.
Finding 5 – HTCs recovered and remitted to DAT by local jurisdictions 18
were not recorded when received or deposited in a timely manner.
Finding 6 – DAT has not taken sufficient action to refund $786,000 in 18
HTCs due to certain homeowners for tax years 2017 to 2019.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Personal Property
* Finding 7 – DAT did not obtain available Comptroller of Maryland 19
records to help identify potential businesses that failed to register with
DAT and file personal property returns.
Disbursements
Finding 8 – DAT did not verify the propriety of charges related to 20
technology enterprise services received from the Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) during fiscal years 2020 through
2023, which were valued at $7.7 million.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 22
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 22
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 23
Exhibit 1 – DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report 27
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) is responsible for
administering the State’s real and personal property tax laws and various
functions applicable to corporations (for example, issuing corporate charters and
collecting certain taxes, such as gross receipts tax). DAT also administers
programs that provide property tax credits primarily to homeowners and renters
who meet the related eligibility requirements (such as gross income limitations).
DAT’s headquarters is located in Baltimore City and assessment and taxation
offices are located in each of the State’s 24 local subdivisions.
According to the State’s and DAT’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2022,
DAT’s expenditures totaled approximately $139.9 million (See Figure 1 on the
following page) and revenue collected totaled $324.1 million. DAT’s records for
tax year beginning July 1, 2022, identified the total assessable real property tax
base subject to State tax rates to be valued at approximately $846 billion,
consisting of 2,274,872 individual properties.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
DAT Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 503 88.1%
Frozen1 1 0.2%
Vacant 67 11.7%
Total 571
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 45,848,937 32.8%
Technical and Special Fees 572,968 0.4%
Operating Expenses 93,444,079 66.8%
Total $139,865,984
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $102,857,812 73.5%
Special Fund 37,008,172 26.5%
Total $139,865,984
Source: State financial and personnel records
Real Property Reassessment Notices
State law requires DAT to reevaluate the assessed value of each real property at
least once every three years. As part of this reassessment process, DAT is
required to send a notice to the related property owners of any changes to the
assessed value and provide an opportunity for owners to appeal the new
assessment. Properties are divided into three “areas” within each jurisdiction to
ensure each property is reassessed and a notice is issued once every three years.
DAT contracts with a vendor to print and mail the notices using a preapproved
template and data sent from DAT.
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Frozen
positions were unauthorized to be filled according to budgetary instructions from the Department
of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not been filled
since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
8

--- Page 11 ---
DAT monitors this notification process by providing the notice layout to the
vendor which is tested prior to the actual notices being created, communicating
with the vendor throughout the entire process, performing on-site visits to the
vendor once notices are being printed and packaged for mailing, and reviewing a
sample of the printed notices. DAT also performs a reasonableness test by
comparing the number of notices mailed per postage statements provided by the
vendor to the number of notices that DAT knows should have been issued.
According to DAT’s records, during calendar year 2023 it performed
reassessments of approximately 767,000 properties. The related notices should
have been issued by the end of 2023 (effective January 1, 2024). In February
2024, DAT disclosed to the Maryland General Assembly that DAT and the
vendor identified certain notices that had been duplicated, and approximately
100,000 notices had not been issued by the statutory deadline of January 31, 2024.
We were advised by DAT management that the errors resulted, at least in part due
to DAT’s requested changes to the preexisting notice template to provide more
information to property owners. According to DAT, the changes were requested
late in the process (during October 2023), which disrupted the vendor’s
longstanding printing and mailing processes.
The failure to issue notices by the statutory deadline is significant because it
precludes any changes to the assessed values for another three years unless a
qualifying event were to occur requiring an out-of-cycle assessment, such as
substantially completed improvements to the property. DAT determined that the
potential three-year loss in property tax revenues for the local jurisdictions totaled
$151.6 million for those 100,000 properties that did not receive a notice. To
address these potential losses to the local jurisdictions, Chapter 384, Laws of
Maryland 2024 was enacted effective April 25, 2024, temporarily extending the
deadline for the issuance of notices until May 1, 2024.
Per DAT management, as of May 1, 2024, DAT had issued replacement notices
for the 100,000 properties that were not issued notices prior to the original
deadline. In response to a requirement in the April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report,
DAT prepared a report that described the circumstances resulting in the missing
notices, including several specific factors that contributed to the error. In this
report, DAT management advised the General Assembly that DAT had modified
parts of its process for issuing the notices to increase controls over the process and
reduce the risk of similar errors in the future. DAT’s report is attached to our
report as Exhibit 1.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 5, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2, for
the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that DAT satisfactorily
addressed six of those eight findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in
this report.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) did not have
Finding 1 adequate procedures to ensure all required physical property inspections Not Repeated
were performed.
DAT did not use available output reports to ensure that all real property
assessment appeals recorded in its Assessment and Administration Not Repeated
Finding 2
Valuation System were subject to independent review and approval as
required.
DAT did not ensure that all required personal property returns and filing
fees were received, and that exemptions from filing a return and paying the Repeated
Finding 3
fee were valid. In addition, DAT did not pursue penalties for the untimely (Current Finding 7)
submission of returns in a timely manner.
DAT did not perform timely audits of awarded Homeowners’ Tax Credits
(HTC) or verify the propriety of redeemed HTCs and reimbursement
Repeated
Finding 4 requests from local jurisdictions. In addition, DAT did not ensure local
(Current Finding 4)
jurisdictions recovered and remitted HTCs from homeowners that
transferred their properties.
DAT did not ensure HTCs were properly calculated. As a result, HTCs
Finding 5 awarded to thousands of homeowners in certain jurisdictions were Not Repeated
improperly reduced by at least $4.4 million.
DAT awarded paid administrative leave to a senior management employee
over a five-month period at a cost of $55,860 without any documentation.
Finding 6 Not Repeated
The administrative leave granted was also in excess of the 10-day limit on
administrative leave allowed by State regulations.
DAT did not have adequate controls to ensure that collections were
Finding 7 Not Repeated
properly accounted for and deposited timely.
DAT did not perform an independent supervisory review of corporate
charter transactions to ensure that the proper fees were charged and
Finding 8 Not Repeated
collected. Our review disclosed that expedited processing fees for 3,277
documents were not collected.
DAT’s procedures for logging and monitoring critical database and
Finding 9 Status Redacted2
mainframe security events were not sufficient.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Homestead Property Tax Credits
Background
State law established the homestead property tax credit (HPTC) to help
homeowners who have had large assessment increases on their principal
residence. The law limits the increase in county and State taxable assessments on
individual owner-occupied properties to a fixed percentage of the preceding
year’s taxable assessment, thereby limiting the potential increase in property taxes
due from the homeowner. Every Maryland county and municipality is required to
establish the limit on taxable assessment increases at 10 percent or less each year.
State law also limits the taxable assessment increases to 10 percent or less each
year for computing the State’s portion of the tax.
According to State law, only owner-occupied residences are eligible for the
HPTC, and a property owner may only receive the credit on one property. An
owner generally must reside at the applicable property for at least six months of
the year, including July 1 of the year for which the credit is received. When a
property is transferred to a new owner as evidenced by a deed, the property would
lose its HPTC eligibility until a valid application for the credit is filed by the new
owner. The new owner pays property taxes based on the most recent phased-in
assessed value of the property. If a new application is submitted and approved,
the new owner would then begin to receive the benefit of assessment limits
provided by the HPTC.
According to State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) records,
HPTCs were applied to approximately 405,000 properties in the State for the tax
year starting July 1, 2022, reducing the taxable base by approximately $726.4
million for State property taxes and by approximately $22.1 billion for county
property taxes.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
DAT was not reviewing the results of certain data matches that identified
potential changes in property ownership and improper HPTCs, and was not
using independent records of rental properties to identify and investigate
potentially improper credits. Our review of both the match results and
certain rental property records disclosed property owners who were
receiving improper credits.
Analysis
DAT was not reviewing the results of routine data matches received from the
Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA), which were conducted to help identify
potential changes in property ownership and improper HPTCs. In addition,
similar matching procedures using independent records of rental properties had
not been implemented by DAT to help identify potentially improper credits. Our
review of both the MVA match results and certain independent records of rental
properties we obtained disclosed homeowners who were receiving improper
HPTCs.
Reviews of Driver’s License Match Results Not Conducted
As of March 2023, MVA data match results used to help identify improper
HPTCs had not been reviewed by DAT for any periods after March 2021, even
though more current results were available. On a routine basis, DAT provides
HPTC recipient data to the MVA for matching to driver’s license data. MVA
matches the HPTC data against its records and sends DAT a report of any changes
to MVA records for the HPTC recipients. Such changes, for example a change in
address, may signify a change in property ownership requiring deletion of the
prior owner’s HPTC and the need for an HPTC application from the new owner.
Our review of 30 properties from the September 2022 match results3 (which as
noted had not yet been reviewed by DAT) indicating that at least one of the
homeowners had surrendered their license to another state4, disclosed 28
properties receiving an improper HPTC because either the property was sold to a
new owner or the property no longer served as the owner’s principal residence.
For example, our analysis of one of the 28 properties disclosed that the property
was sold; however, the prior homeowner’s HPTC eligibility was not removed.
The current homeowner had not filed a new HPTC application and continued to
benefit from the previous owner’s HPTC without the property’s eligibility status
3 The 30 property accounts selected received reductions in their 2023 taxable base totaling $3.3
million.
4 We selected accounts that had a license surrendered prior to November 2017. DAT was unable
to explain why certain accounts appeared on the September 2022 report and not on previous
reports.
12

--- Page 15 ---
being properly adjusted. DAT was not aware of the sale and as a result, the new
homeowner had received improper reductions of their property taxes totaling at
least $9,500 over a period of seven years.
Overall, the September 2022 match results identified 22,285 property accounts
that were on record to receive an HPTC and where one of the related homeowners
had surrendered their license to another state, was deceased, or had changed their
address. These properties were on record to receive reductions in their tax year
2023 taxable base for the State and counties of $41.4 million and $1.2 billion,
respectively, because of the HPTC. Further investigation would be required to
determine if any of those reductions, in addition to those we noted, were
improper.
No Procedure to Review Independent Records of Rental Properties
DAT had no procedure to routinely review available independent records of rental
properties to help identify properties for which an improper HPTC was being
received. For example, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE)
maintains a record of registered rental properties, primarily constructed prior to
1978, to help monitor compliance with lead poisoning prevention laws. We
obtained a copy of MDE’s database for actively registered rental properties as of
January 2023 and matched it to DAT’s records of properties receiving an HPTC
for the tax year starting July 1, 2022. The match identified 2,872 registered rental
properties that were receiving an HPTC, which we estimated could result in a
reduction of approximately $436,000 in the applicable county and state property
taxes paid, including $431,000 in applicable county tax.5
Our test of 10 of these properties with material prior year HPTCs (specifically, a
reduction in property tax base of at least $80,000) disclosed that all 10 were no
longer qualified for the HPTC since they no longer served as the property owner’s
principal residence. The property owners for these 10 properties received
improper tax reductions for 1 to 11 years totaling $91,000. DAT removed the
HPTC for all 10 properties upon our inquiries. Independent rental property data
may also be available from other State agencies, certain local jurisdictions and
real estate listings of properties for rent.
5 If a portion of a rental property serves as the owner’s principal residence, an HPTC may be
received for the assessed value attributable to that portion of the property. Otherwise, a rental
property is not eligible for an HPTC.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DAT
a. review MVA data match results on a timely basis, and implement
procedures to routinely review independent records of rental properties
to help identify and investigate potentially improper HPTCs; and
b. take corrective action for any improper credits identified, including those
noted above.
Finding 2
Determination of HPTC eligibility for numerous properties remained in
pending status for extended periods without timely investigation and
resolution, resulting in HPTCs being applied to potentially ineligible
properties.
Analysis
Determinations of HPTC eligibility for certain properties remained in pending
status on DAT’s records, neither denied nor approved, for extended periods
without timely investigation and resolution. Timely resolution of pending
eligibility is critical since DAT’s policy is to consider a property eligible for the
HPTC while in pending status. Furthermore, if a property is determined to be
ineligible for the HPTC and additional taxes are subsequently owed, State law
limits the number of prior years for which taxes can be collected to seven years
from the date the tax was due. According to DAT’s records, as of July 2022,
there were 5,450 property accounts that were in pending status for the HPTC, of
which 1,564 had been pending for more than a year (including 680 property
accounts that received an HPTC). The overall reduction in taxable base for these
properties totaled $25.8 million for tax year 2022.
Our review of 20 of these property accounts that had been in pending status for
more than 5 years as of January 31, 2023, disclosed that in many cases DAT had
previously made a determination, but had not updated its records and ensured the
account was moved out of pending status. In this regard, one of the accounts
reviewed had been denied eligibility, but it continued to receive an HPTC because
DAT’s property records still showed the account as pending.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DAT
a. ensure that supervisory personnel periodically perform documented
reviews of properties in pending status for extended periods to verify the
propriety of that status; and
14

--- Page 17 ---
b. take steps to bring those properties to resolution and to correct any
recordkeeping errors, including the 1,564 properties noted in this finding.
Finding 3
DAT did not have formal procedures to notify local taxing authorities of
ineligible HPTC recipients so that they could assess any property taxes due
in accordance with State law.
Analysis
DAT did not have formal procedures for informing local taxing authorities, which
are responsible for collecting both State and county taxes, whenever it determined
that a property had been receiving an HPTC for which it was not eligible and that
property taxes that would have otherwise been due should be assessed. As a
result, local taxing authorities did not know to collect taxes due during periods of
ineligibility as required by State law.
State law provides that if a property owner has been receiving an HPTC for which
they are not eligible, the property owner is to be assessed all State, county, and
municipal corporation property taxes that would have otherwise been due for each
taxable year that the property owner did not qualify to receive the credit. This
provision applies whether DAT initially failed to detect an invalid credit (as noted
in Finding 1) or a property owner received an HPTC while their account was in
pending status but eligibility was subsequently denied (as noted in Finding 2). As
previously noted, State law limits the number of prior years for which taxes can
be collected to seven years from the date the tax was due.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DAT establish formal procedures for notifying local
taxing authorities when it determines that a property has been receiving an
HPTC for which it was not eligible. These procedures should ensure that the
applicable local DAT offices are advised of all such determinations, that all
notifications are documented and forwarded by either DAT headquarters or
the applicable local DAT office, and that notifications include all information
and data necessary to allow local taxing authorities to assess all property
taxes otherwise due as required by law.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Homeowners’ Tax Credits
Background
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, DAT approved 38,870
homeowners’ tax credits (HTC) totaling approximately $57 million. HTCs are
awarded to homeowners with a combined household income of up to $60,000,
allowing a credit against the homeowners’ property tax bill when the property
taxes exceed a fixed percentage of the household’s gross income. To receive the
HTC, homeowners must submit an application, along with supporting
documentation, to DAT by October 1 of the fiscal year for which the HTC is
being requested. 6 For example, applications for fiscal year 2023 property taxes
were due by October 1, 2022.
DAT headquarters staff process the HTC applications, determine the amount of
each credit, and notify the local jurisdictions which issue the credits on tax bills or
as refunds depending on when the applications were received. The State
ultimately bears the cost of reduced tax revenue due to HTCs. Accordingly, to
make local jurisdictions whole, State law requires them to submit reimbursement
requests for redeemed HTCs to DAT, which then certifies to the Comptroller of
Maryland that the requested reimbursement is due to the jurisdiction.
Homeowners who receive an HTC and then transfer ownership of the property
during the year of the award must return the HTC either in full or on a prorated
basis.
Finding 4
DAT did not perform timely audits of HTC applications and did not ensure
local jurisdictions recovered and remitted HTCs from homeowners that
transferred their properties.
Analysis
DAT did not perform timely audits of HTC applications and did not ensure local
jurisdictions recovered and remitted all HTCs from homeowners that transferred
their properties.
 DAT did not conduct timely audits of questionable HTC applications as
required by its policy. DAT generates reports that identify (a) discrepancies
between income reported on the application and the applicant’s State income
tax return, and (b) significant fluctuations between income reported by the
applicant in the current and previous years. However, as of November 2022,
6 Effective June 1, 2020, Chapter 507, Laws of Maryland 2020 extended the application deadline
from September 1st to October 1st.
16

--- Page 19 ---
DAT had not audited applicants identified on the 2016 and 2017 income
discrepancy reports, and had not generated reports for any subsequent years.
DAT also had not audited applicants identified on the 2019 income fluctuation
report and had not generated the reports for any subsequent years. These
audits are critical for helping to ensure the propriety and accuracy of HTCs.
The 2017 income discrepancy report and the 2019 income fluctuation report
identified 2,396 and 5,365 accounts, respectively, that should have been
subject to audits per DAT policy.
 DAT did not review available property transfer reports to ensure that any
HTCs awarded to homeowners that subsequently transferred ownership of
their property were recovered and remitted to DAT as required. Although
DAT’s policy required DAT employees to review these reports, DAT relied
on the local jurisdictions to identify, recover, and remit any HTCs due. In
addition, we determined that the transfer reports being generated were not
complete. For example, we noted at least 12 jurisdictions that remitted
payments for recovered HTCs totaling approximately $306,000 for fiscal year
2022 even though the transfer reports for that year indicated that no HTCs
needed to be recovered by those jurisdictions. For another jurisdiction the
reports identified $1,762 in HTCs to be recovered, but the actual amount
recovered and remitted by that jurisdiction totaled approximately $62,000.
The lack of timely audits has been commented upon in our four preceding audit
reports dating back to 2010, and the lack of review of transfer reports was
commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response to our preceding
report, DAT agreed to perform timely audits and indicated that the audits of the
2016 and 2017 income discrepancy reports would be completed by April 2021. In
addition, DAT indicated that it intended to review the transfer reports; however,
no reviews were conducted.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DAT
a. perform timely audits of HTC applications (repeat),
b. review transfer reports to ensure that any HTCs due from homeowners
who had transferred ownership of their property were recovered and
remitted to DAT as required (repeat), and
c. take steps to ensure that the transfer reports include all transferred
properties and corresponding HTCs to be recovered.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 5
HTCs recovered and remitted to DAT by local jurisdictions were not
recorded when received or deposited in a timely manner.
Analysis
HTCs recovered and remitted to DAT by local jurisdictions were not recorded
when received or deposited in a timely manner. In addition, DAT could not
provide documentation that it had received and deposited recovered HTCs
totaling $62,000 reported by one local jurisdiction.
During fiscal years 2021 and 2022 local jurisdictions reported and remitted 235
checks totaling $775,000 in recovered HTCs to DAT. Our review of the 62
deposits related to these funds identified 132 checks totaling $419,000 that were
deposited from 21 to 159 days following the date of issuance by the local
jurisdiction, including 50 that exceeded 40 days. We were unable to readily
determine the dates these checks were received by DAT because DAT did not
record the checks upon receipt. In addition, our review of reports submitted to
DAT by one local jurisdiction disclosed $62,000 in HTCs recovered for fiscal
year 2022, but did not include information about when those amounts were
received and deposited.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over cash receipts, including initial
recordation and the depositing of cash receipts within one working day.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DAT
a. ensure that all collections are recorded upon receipt and deposited in a
timely manner, and
b. ensure that the aforementioned $62,000 was received and deposited.
Finding 6
DAT has not taken sufficient action to refund $786,000 in HTCs due to
certain homeowners for tax years 2017 to 2019.
Analysis
DAT has not taken sufficient action to refund $786,000 due to certain
homeowners for tax years 2017 to 2019. In our preceding audit report, we noted
that HTCs awarded to thousands of homeowners in certain jurisdictions were
improperly reduced by at least $4.4 million in fiscal year 2019. We
recommended that DAT consult with legal counsel on how to proceed regarding
18

--- Page 21 ---
any refunds due as a result of the HTC miscalculations. In response to our report,
DAT initially disagreed with our finding and our recommendation that there was a
need for any reimbursements to homeowners related to this issue.
Chapter 717, Laws of Maryland 2021, required DAT to determine whether certain
homeowners were owed tax refunds because of required adjustments to how their
HTCs were calculated for tax years 2017 to 2020. As a result, DAT made refund
payments totaling $7.9 million to 5,393 owners. However, as of October 2022,
DAT still had not paid $786,000 in refunds which it had determined during fiscal
year 2022 was owed to 707 additional owners.
According to DAT, they did not issue the refunds because certain additional due
diligence was required (such as locating the homeowner). We were also advised
that these refunds were initially intended to be disclosed through DAT’s website
for potentially eligible claimants to search for outstanding refunds due, but this
did not occur due to concerns with disclosing personally identifiable information.
We reviewed refunds totaling $41,520 that had still not been made to 20 of the
aforementioned 707 owners and noted that for 14 refunds, DAT had sufficient
information to process the refunds. Specifically, based on our review it did not
appear as if ownership of the related property had been transferred, and in 9 cases,
the related owner had received an HTC for the same property for tax year 2022.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DAT take the necessary steps to notify all remaining
homeowners to which refunds are due, and to ensure that any required
refunds are paid promptly.
Personal Property
Finding 7
DAT did not obtain available Comptroller of Maryland records to help
identify potential businesses that failed to register with DAT and file
personal property returns.
Analysis
DAT did not review information available from the Comptroller of Maryland,
such as entities receiving payments from the State and entities with active sales
tax accounts, to help identify businesses that failed to register with DAT and file
personal property returns as required. Personal property returns are due to DAT
by April 15 each year and must include a filing fee of $300 ($100 under limited
19

--- Page 22 ---
circumstances). DAT uses the returns to annually certify the assessed value of
personal property (for example furniture, certain equipment, and inventory)
owned by business entities, such as corporations, limited liability companies, and
partnerships as prescribed by State law. Maryland’s 24 local jurisdictions use the
assessed values to calculate taxes due from the applicable entities.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to February 2018. In response to our preceding report, DAT
indicated that it had modified its data sharing agreement with the Comptroller to
periodically receive the data. However, during our current audit DAT
management advised us that it would no longer conduct the reviews because of
difficulties in matching DAT records to the Comptroller’s records and because
previous results did not identify significant noncompliance. However, DAT was
unable to provide documentation to support these assertions.
According to its records, DAT collected $121.1 million in personal property filing
fees during fiscal year 2022. In addition, as of June 30, 2022, DAT had processed
405,032 personal property returns for calendar year 2020, providing local
jurisdictions with a personal property assessable tax base of $13.4 billion.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DAT
a. use available Comptroller of Maryland records to identify and pursue
entities that have not registered and filed a required personal property
return (repeat); and
b. document any decision to not use those records and data and the related
reasons, such as the results of a formal cost benefit analysis of their use.
Disbursements
Finding 8
DAT did not verify the propriety of charges related to technology enterprise
services received from the Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
during fiscal years 2020 through 2023, which were valued at $7.7 million.
Analysis
DAT did not obtain adequate documentation to verify the propriety of charges
related to technology enterprise services received from DoIT during fiscal years
2020 through 2023, which were valued at $7.7 million. In addition, DAT was
unable to explain an increase of over 40 percent in these charges from $1.7
million in fiscal year 2021 to $2.5 million in fiscal year 2023. Furthermore, as
20

--- Page 23 ---
noted in our subsequent findings, certain enterprise services provided by DoIT
were not sufficiently comprehensive raising questions about the propriety of
amounts invoiced.
At the beginning of fiscal year 2020, DoIT transitioned to a cost allocation model
for technology enterprise services provided to State agencies, including DAT.
Under this model, a total budget for services to be provided is prepared by DoIT.
DoIT then submits invoices to be paid in four equal quarterly payments based on
that budget. However, DAT and DoIT did not execute a memorandum of
understanding (MOU) indicating the specific services to be provided, and the
invoices submitted to DAT lacked supporting documentation to substantiate the
services provided and the related costs. DAT management advised us that there
was no other breakdown of services and costs, and that they just paid the invoiced
amounts.
In our two preceding audit reports on DoIT dated May 1, 2020 and March 29,
2024, we recommended that DoIT enter into MOUs with the State agencies that
receive technology enterprise services. DoIT agreed with these recommendations
and stated that its staff would work with agencies to execute MOUs. According
to DAT management, the former Chief Information Officer for DAT had drafted
and submitted an agreement to DoIT outlining each agency’s roles and
responsibilities; however, neither this agreement nor an alternative had been
executed as of May 2023.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DAT
a. ensure that all charges invoiced by DoIT are proper;
b. execute an MOU with DoIT that specifies DoIT’s responsibilities for
providing technology enterprise services to DAT, including the individual
services to be provided, the related costs, and required documentation to
support amounts invoiced; and
c. determine the propriety of the amounts previously invoiced and recover
any amounts determined to have been billed improperly.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 9 and 10 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DAT’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation (DAT) for the period beginning March 25, 2019 and
ending August 31, 2022. The majority of our fieldwork, including the review of
SDAT’s significant areas of operations, was conducted from August 22, 2022 to
May 12, 2023. However, certain significant concerns were identified during
February 2024 when DAT disclosed that a large number of property owners were
not issued assessment notices as required, resulting in additional fieldwork related
to DAT’s oversight of the printing and mailing of assessment notices and related
corrective actions being conducted from February 21, 2024 to June 27, 2024. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DAT’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial and
information systems related areas of operations based on assessments of
significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit included homeowners and
homestead property tax credits, real property assessments, personal property
assessments, cash receipts, and information systems security and control. Our
audit also included various support services (such as purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records and related fiscal functions) provided by DAT to the Property
Tax Assessment Appeals Board, which is audited separately. We also determined
the status of the nine findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 25, 2019 to August 31, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DAT’s operations. Generally,
23

--- Page 26 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the Assessment Administration and Valuation
System, the Maryland Business Entity System, the Homeowners' Tax Credit
System, and the Homestead Credit Application System for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as real property assessments, cash receipts, and tax credits. As
part of our audit, we also obtained data from the Maryland Department of the
Environment’s Lead Rental Registry for the purposes of performing an electronic
match against properties being claimed as principal residences to receive a
homestead property tax credit. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DAT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DAT, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DAT’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DAT that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that certain findings in this report
fall under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DAT and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
DAT’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
25

--- Page 28 ---
Code of Maryland, we will advise DAT regarding the results of our review of its
response.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
28

--- Page 30 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
29

--- Page 31 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
30

--- Page 32 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
31

--- Page 33 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
32

--- Page 34 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
33

--- Page 35 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
34

--- Page 36 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
35

--- Page 37 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
36

--- Page 38 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
37

--- Page 39 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
38

--- Page 40 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
39

--- Page 41 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
40

--- Page 42 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
41

--- Page 43 ---
Exhibit 1 (cid:16)(cid:3)DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
42

--- Page 44 ---
Exhibit 1 (cid:16)(cid:3)DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
43

--- Page 45 ---
Exhibit 1 (cid:16)(cid:3)DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
44

--- Page 46 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
45

--- Page 47 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
46

--- Page 48 ---
Exhibit 1
DAT Response to April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
47

--- Page 49 ---
APPENDIX
September 17, 2024
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21291
Re: OLA Audit of Maryland State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Dear Mr. Tanen:
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) has received the fiscal compliance
audit submitted by the Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits, for the period
beginning March 25, 2019 and ending August 31, 2022.
SDAT would like to extend sincere appreciation for the thorough and professional work carried out during
this recent audit. Please find enclosed our formal response, which addresses the observations and
recommendations outlined in the audit report.
Sincerely,
Dan Phillips
Director, State Department of Assessments and Taxation
cc: Robert Yeager, Deputy Director
Kanchana Wijeratne, Compliance Director

--- Page 50 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Homestead Property Tax Credits (HPTC)
Finding 1
DAT was not reviewing the results of certain data matches that identified
potential changes in property ownership and improper HPTCs and was not
using independent records of rental properties to identify and investigate
potentially improper credits. Our review of both the match results and
certain rental property records disclosed property owners who were
receiving improper credits.
We recommend that DAT
a. review MVA data match results on a timely basis and implement
procedures to routinely review independent records of rental properties
to help identify and investigate potentially improper HPTCs; ands
b. take corrective action for any improper credits identified, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The MVA data match reviewed by the auditors can be separated into
additional comments as three sub-categories: address change, surrendered, or deceased. This
deemed necessary. audit gives a report of any person who has an approved Homestead
application on file that has an owner or applicant pass away, change
address, or surrender their license to another state. Prior to November
2023, MVA data matches were audited manually by a three-person
Homestead audit team. The MVA audit received from the Annapolis
Data Center (ADC) mainframe would match the address reported on a
Homestead application with the MVA data reflecting new address
changes. This method triggered many redundancies and duplicate
matches simply because it would report matches of new owners who
were updating their license to reflect the new property address for which
a Homestead application had been submitted, thereby creating between
10,000 to 15,000 duplicate accounts requiring review by three
personnel on a monthly basis. DAT does not deny OLA’s review of 30
properties matched in September 2022, yielding 28 MVA matched
results based on address changes. However, these changes of address
simply reflect a new homeowner updating their license in accordance
with the new property address listed on their Homestead application,
Currently, when a property is purchased, the Homestead Tax Credit
application is submitted at closing. During settlement, new property
Page 1 of 17

--- Page 51 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
owners are required to answer whether the property is owner-occupied
or not. This status is input into the Homestead system. Real Property
assessors also routinely update this status based on their three-year
cyclical field reviews.
The only mechanism by which DAT reviews properties for rental use is
by matching those currently receiving the Homestead Tax Credit to
those in the Rental Tax Credit Application Database. Outside of that,
Homestead Tax Credit auditors have no knowledge of properties being
used for rental purposes unless they are notified by the local assessment
offices. If the owner reports that their property is rented, the local Real
Property assessment office is notified, and the occupancy code is
changed. Subsequently, the tax credit application is denied. The review
and audit of Homestead applicant data is a manual process currently
undergoing refinement with the implementation of a cloud-based
application system, aiming to enhance efficiency and accuracy.
Auditor’s Comment: DAT’s response states that the 28 items noted in the finding were
a change of address to simply reflect a new homeowner updating their license in
accordance with the new property address listed on their Homestead application. As
stated in the finding we reviewed 30 properties from the September 2022 match
indicating that at least one of the homeowners had surrendered their license to another
state, and noted 28 properties receiving an improper Homestead property tax credit
because either the property was sold to a new owner or no longer served as the owner’s
principal residence, for at least a period of time. As such the change in address has
significant implications on the propriety of the credit and we continue to believe that such
changes should be reviewed to ensure the individual is still qualified.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of DAT has begun to take corrective action for any improper credits
corrective action or identified, including those identified by the OLA’s review. As of
explain disagreement. November 2023, the new MVA audit that uses driver’s license data is
being conducted via the tax credits application cloud-based platform.
The most recent audit completed was for the month of January 2024.
This process requires the tax credit application developers to complete
additional filtering to account for duplicate results. Once complete, the
MVA audit will automatically be able to identify properties that are no
longer eligible for the tax credit monthly.
Page 2 of 17

--- Page 52 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
The Tax Credits Program Manager will work with its vendor to create a
separate audit where properties receiving a Homestead Tax Credit will
be run against data received from the Maryland Department of
Environment's Lead Rental Registry. This audit will be reviewed
monthly by the audit team to update the eligibility code of properties
built before 1978 who have registered for a Lead Free inspection
certification and continue to renew annually under the same owner. The
eligibility code of these properties will be changed and the local
assessment offices will be notified so the owner-occupancy code is
updated to reflect the change documented. Local finance offices and
treasurers will then be notified so any improper credits can be collected.
Additionally, DAT leadership will update the 2025 Homestead
Application to include wording instructing property owners to notify
DAT when there has been a change in eligibility and/or properties are no
longer used as a principal residence.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of A review of the ten properties noted in this finding was completed on
corrective action or 03/21/2023. Property accounts were investigated to assess their date of
explain disagreement. eligibility and the years in which a registration with the Lead Rental
Registry was completed. Of the ten reviewed, seven of the properties had
their eligibility status removed once it was confirmed that the property
was a rental. Two of the accounts were moved to an archive database as
further investigation revealed that the property had been transferred. The
Homestead Tax Credit application was removed from the active/current
Homestead database which removed the Homestead eligibility status and
date in the Real Property database. For these accounts, the local treasurer
was notified so improper credits could be collected. One of the accounts
was approved for the Homestead Tax Credit after a valid application was
submitted under new owners. DAT will also assess the system’s ability
to run a match of Lead Free Registry addresses against properties
currently receiving a Homestead Tax Credit for principal residence. The
MVA matches and the MDE matches identified by OLA will be
reviewed by the Homestead Tax Credit Audit Team. Once identified, the
Homestead Tax Credits application will be removed and local finance
offices will be notified so that improper credits can be recaptured.
Page 3 of 17

--- Page 53 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
Determination of HPTC eligibility for numerous properties remained in
pending status for extended periods without timely investigation and
resolution, resulting in HPTCs being applied to potentially ineligible
properties.
We recommend that DAT
a. ensure that supervisory personnel periodically perform documented
reviews of properties in pending status for extended periods to verify the
propriety of that status; and
b. take steps to bring those properties to resolution and to correct any
recordkeeping errors, including the 1,564 properties noted in this finding.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DAT agrees with this finding. In the previous application system, if an
additional comments as owner were to make any changes to an existing deed such as adding a
deemed necessary. co-owner, the system would automatically calculate to show the number
of days pending from the original filing. This would cause a property to
incorrectly appear as if it were in pending status from the original date of
application.
The Department employs the use of a Computer Assisted Mass
Appraisal (CAMA) system, known as AAVS, to record information
from a deed. This is managed by the Real Property Unit of DAT. To
determine eligibility, a program extracts that data from AAVS and sends
it to the application system, a program used to house Tax Credits
application information and managed by DAT’s Office of Information
Technology (OIT). A data match of any newly recorded sales would
trigger a Homestead application to be sent to the new owner. This, in
turn, would reset the application code to reflect there is “No Application
on File.”
Once Real Property receives a deed, the data is captured by AAVS.
Previously, AAVS recorded the Date of Sale (which reflected the date
the deed was signed by all parties), and the Recorded Date (which
reflected the date the deed was filed at the local land records office). In
2021, Maryland law ruled that only the Recorded Date was to be used in
AAVS. Following that change, the Date of Sale Field was removed from
the AAVS database. This change was not accurately captured in the
Page 4 of 17

--- Page 54 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
system information transfer and resulted in accounts incorrectly showing
a status of No Application on File. As of July 2023, these data fields
have been extracted correctly and all changes made in AAVS are
uploaded correctly into the application system. These changes in the
application program are then updated and sent back to AAVS so that the
Application on File and Tax Credit status are now accurate.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The Department agrees that a control needs to be put in place to
corrective action or periodically review properties, however DAT has enhanced its process
explain disagreement. of timely application review. The Homestead Tax Credits data cloud-
based application, auto-populates the oldest applications received first
(then they are prioritized and processed). As of April 2024, once an
application is processed, any response or requests for further
documentation or correspondence will automatically put the application
into a denial status within 90 days. A Homestead supervisor reviews two
reports monthly.
The first report created shows ‘Records Pending 90+ Days.’ The second
is a report of legacy applications from January 2018 to December 2022
with a pending application. This ensures that properties in pending status
are processed in a timely manner and do not improperly reflect a
pending status for extended periods of time.
Annually, the AAVS supervisory personnel will run a report that
matches the Homestead eligibility status to that of the properties in the
cloud-based tax credits application system to verify and resolve any
interface issues.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2025
Please provide details of The AAVS Supervisor has since brought those aforementioned
corrective action or properties to resolution and the record keeping errors have been
explain disagreement. resolved. Currently, a pending status in AAVS dictates that an
application has been received but has not been processed, or that further
documentation has been requested. The date reflects when an application
has been approved or denied. As of April 2024, the pending status date is
not captured in the AAVS system. The Homestead Tax Credit audit team
is requesting new applications to be submitted for the 1,564 accounts
that were identified in this finding and removing eligibility if a response
has not been received.
Page 5 of 17

--- Page 55 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
DAT did not have formal procedures to notify local taxing authorities of
ineligible HPTC recipients so that they could assess any property taxes due
in accordance with State law.
We recommend that DAT establish formal procedures for notifying local
taxing authorities when it determines that a property has been receiving an
HPTC for which it was not eligible. These procedures should ensure that the
applicable local DAT offices are advised of all such determinations, that all
notifications are documented and forwarded by either DAT headquarters or
the applicable local DAT office, and that notifications include all information
and data necessary to allow local taxing authorities to assess all property
taxes otherwise due as required by law.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DAT agrees with these findings and recommendations.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Since the on-premises OLA visit in 2023, the Homestead audit
corrective action or supervisor has begun recapturing credits for these properties. A policy
explain disagreement. was created to inform local taxing authorities of their responsibility to
collect taxes due. The Homestead Tax Credit audit team has
implemented the formal procedure as of April 2024. Once a property’s
Homestead Tax Credit Application has been denied or it has been
identified in an audit, the property’s eligibility status is updated. On a
monthly basis, communication is sent to the local assessment offices
requesting the recapture of the improper Homestead Tax Credits for
those identified properties. This communication includes the property
account number along with the specific tax year(s) for which the
recapture is needed. This information is forwarded by the local county
assessment office to the local county finance office. A response is
provided to the local county assessment office once the recapture has
been completed. The Homestead Audit Supervisor maintains a
spreadsheet log of all emails sent to the local county assessment offices
in a recapture folder to document the requests for recapture of the
Homestead Tax Credits.
Page 6 of 17

--- Page 56 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Homeowners’ Tax Credits (HTC)
Finding 4
DAT did not perform timely audits of HTC applications and did not ensure
local jurisdictions recovered and remitted HTCs from homeowners that
transferred their properties.
We recommend that DAT
a. perform timely audits of HTC applications (repeat),
b. review transfer reports to ensure that any HTCs due from homeowners
who had transferred ownership of their property were recovered and
remitted to DAT as required (repeat), and
c. take steps to ensure that the transfer reports include all transferred
properties and corresponding HTCs to be recovered.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department agrees with this finding. The Tax Credits department
additional comments as has dealt with the challenge of maintaining a consistent work force to
deemed necessary. audit Homeowner’s Tax Credits. This coupled with the manual nature of
the income discrepancy and income fluctuation audit contributed to a
backlog that has kept the unit from completing the audits in a timely
manner.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of The Tax Credits program manager has trained an audit staff team to
corrective action or address the audit backlog. The 2016 income discrepancy audit that
explain disagreement. reviews based on Federally Adjusted Gross Income (FAGI) data has
been completed as of December 2023. The 2017 income discrepancy
(FAGI) audit has been completed as of August 2024.
DAT has utilized the new application system to process applications.
Effective February 2024, in the new tax credits application platform, the
income fluctuation audit will be an automated front-end audit. Utilizing
this enhanced system, trained auditors will be able to complete the
backlog of audits by June 2025.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2024
Please provide details of The former application system was not able to generate the Transfer
corrective action or Audit Report weekly. Effective February 2023, Tax Credits auditors are
explain disagreement. able to access the Transfer Audit report from the new application system
and review this weekly. The transfer reports are reviewed along with the
Page 7 of 17

--- Page 57 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
recapture reports submitted by the local Finance/Treasurer's office. The
Audit Division follows up with the local Finance/Treasurer's office to
resolve any discrepancies and verify that recaptured HTCs are remitted.
DAT receives a monthly Transfer Reports of all property transactions
captured in AAVS. Transfer Reports are reviewed against what local
counties remit to the Comptroller via the Revenue Accounting Journal
form sent monthly. DAT then notifies the local Finance/Treasurer's
office to alert and review/resolve any discrepancies.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of The monthly Transfer Report includes all transferred properties as
corrective action or reported in AAVS. The amount of the HTC recapture is determined by
explain disagreement. the property's date of transfer. The Tax Credit Transfer audit clerk will
use the recordation date to complete a calculation spreadsheet to
determine the recapture amounts monthly. DAT will reach out to that
local county’s Finance/ Treasurer’s office with any discrepancies.
Page 8 of 17

--- Page 58 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
HTCs recovered and remitted to DAT by local jurisdictions were not
recorded when received or deposited in a timely manner.
We recommend that DAT
a. ensure that all collections are recorded upon receipt and deposited in a
timely manner as required by the Comptroller’s Accounting Procedures
Manual, and
b. ensure that the aforementioned $62,000 was received and deposited.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide DAT agrees with this finding.
additional comments as OLA’s review of check deposits coincided with the department’s return
deemed necessary. from COVID work conditions. During 2021 and 2022, DAT enforced
stringent teleworking policies to comply with health regulations to
ensure employee safety. Therefore, employees were not on-site to
process mail daily. This, coupled with severe lags in the mail system,
resulted in the delays captured in these findings. DAT’s Accounting
system also recorded the date reflected on the check as the date of
receipt erroneously.
The process by which local jurisdictions report and remit recovered
HTC’s requires verification by the Tax Credit’s Deputy Director. DAT
certifies the amount of reimbursement due each county, instead of
the counties reporting that information directly to the Comptroller.
To receive reimbursements, each jurisdiction is required to submit three
reports to DAT monthly.
Once the reviews are complete, the redemption reimbursement totals are
recorded and the Spreadsheet Log and Invoice are completed and
forwarded to DAT’s Accounting Department. This department then
submits them to the Annapolis General Accounting Dept. (GAD) for
disbursement.
Since 2020, the Deputy Program Manager has been in charge of this
process. This involves independently communicating with financial
clerks from all 24 local counties. If reports cannot be matched, the
Deputy director must complete an investigation, and in some cases, help
the new personnel in some counties locate the necessary information.
This becomes time consuming and lengthy. Effective March 2024, an
administrative assistant will be trained to fulfill these duties on a
monthly basis.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2023
Page 9 of 17

--- Page 59 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Effective March 1, 2024, the duties of verification and redemption will
corrective action or be administered by an appointed Tax Credits Administrative Clerk.
explain disagreement. Local counties will be required to enhance their process of filing
accurately so that it will match the checks received by the DAT Tax
Credits unit.
In November of 2023, formal accounting procedures were adopted to
ensure the Comptroller of Maryland’s guidelines are adhered to and
checks are deposited within one working day. The DAT Accounting
department implemented a policy to process checks daily, recording the
date of receipt. This policy also ensures that the checks are deposited and
recorded within one working day.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2024
Please provide details of To verify that the correct amount was recovered, the Tax Credits Deputy
corrective action or Director reviewed the amount of total redemptions submitted by this
explain disagreement. local jurisdiction in the fiscal year of 2022. DAT was unable to do so
because in that year, the jurisdiction exercised the practice of
withholding a portion of the state reimbursement to offset the $62,000.
Had they remitted the total tax credits and followed the processed
adhered to by all other counties, that amount would have been
reimbursed once verified.
Page 10 of 17

--- Page 60 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
DAT has not taken sufficient action to refund $786,000 in HTCs due to
certain homeowners for tax years 2017 to 2019.
We recommend that DAT take the necessary steps to notify all remaining
homeowners to which refunds are due, and to ensure that any required
refunds are paid promptly.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DAT agrees with this finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary. DAT determined all owners who were owed credits according to
Chapter 717, Laws of Maryland 2021. On September 1, 2021, letters
were sent to those impacted informing those constituents how to recover
their funds. A total of $7.9 million were successfully refunded to these
property owners. However, some of the property owners were not
notified as letters came back as undeliverable due to several reasons such
as changes in address or transfer of property.
DAT employed DoIT to create an online portal that would allow the
department to inform owners of credit due and how to collect. DoIT was
unable to deploy the portal due to an inability to agree on a solution that
protected all Personally Identifiable Information.
Auditor’s Comment: DAT indicated letters were sent informing those impacted how to
recover their funds. However, as noted in the finding, not all those impacted were
notified. As such, we continue to recommend that DAT identify and notify these
individuals of the outstanding refunds.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2024
Please provide details of The Department's goal is to get 707 unclaimed/undeliverable
corrective action or homeowners' property tax credit refunds into the hands of their rightful
explain disagreement. recipients.
Legislation that mandated these refunds was effective June 1, 2021.
Therefore, under the applicable statute, the refund property is not
presumed abandoned until June 1, 2024 at the earliest.
By October 1, 2024, DAT will mail a notification to the last known
Page 11 of 17

--- Page 61 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
address of all recipients advising the availability of these funds. After a
30-day waiting period from the mailing date, DAT will report the
lingering unclaimed refunds as Unclaimed Property to the Comptroller
along with a check for the unclaimed amounts. DAT will post a general
notification online alerting property owner’s that they may be due a
refund from past years along with information on where to inquire about
collecting those funds promptly.
Page 12 of 17

--- Page 62 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Personal Property
Finding 7
DAT did not obtain available Comptroller of Maryland records to help
identify potential businesses that failed to register with DAT and file
personal property returns.
We recommend that DAT
a. use available Comptroller of Maryland records to identify and pursue
entities that have not registered and filed a required personal property
return (repeat); and
b. document any decision to not use those records and data and the related
reasons, such as the results of a formal cost benefit analysis of their use.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional DAT agrees with this finding.
comments as deemed
necessary. The Comptroller’s data has not been used by DAT since 2016 once it
was proven that the data match would only return a match of 10
percent based on business entity names.
There is a lack of a universal identifier that can be used to compare
entities with an active sales tax account (assigned by the Comptroller)
to entities that have registered with the Department (assigned by
DAT). While no state agency objected to the idea of creating a
Maryland Identification Number, it was determined that this project
should be placed on hold until DAT and the Comptroller complete
their major IT development projects, which are already underway.
DAT’s project began in 2022 with an expected completion year of
2025, and the Comptroller is expecting implementation to occur in the
fourth quarter of 2024. Reconfiguring these systems to accommodate a
unique Maryland Identification Number midstream may be outside the
scope of the procurement.
Auditor’s Comment: While DAT indicated agreement with our recommendations, it
notes above that the Comptroller’s data has not been used by DAT since 2016 once it was
proven that the data match would only return a match of 10 percent based on business
entity names. As noted in the finding DAT was unable to support the return percentage
during or subsequent to the audit.
Page 13 of 17

--- Page 63 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion December
Date: 2024
Please provide details of The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) has
corrective action or convened a task force to study and make recommendations on the
explain disagreement. adoption of a unique Maryland Identification Number for both entities
that have registered with DAT and/or entities with active State sales
tax accounts. DAT will obtain Comptroller data to identify and pursue
entities that have failed to file an Annual Report with DAT.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion December
Date: 2024
Please provide details of DAT will conduct a current review of the data obtained and matched
corrective action or from the Comptroller based on the only comparable identifier, the
explain disagreement. legal entity name. A cost-benefit analysis will be performed to
document and justify the decision to discontinue this review if not to
be found cost- beneficial.
Page 14 of 17

--- Page 64 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Disbursements
Finding 8
DAT did not verify the propriety of charges related to technology enterprise
services received from the Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
during fiscal years 2020 through 2023, which were valued at $7.7 million.
We recommend that DAT
a. ensure that all charges invoiced by DoIT are proper;
b. execute an MOU with DoIT that specifies DoIT’s responsibilities for
providing technology enterprise services to DAT, including the individual
services to be provided, the related costs, and required documentation to
support amounts invoiced; and
c. determine the propriety of the amounts previously invoiced and recover
any amounts determined to have been billed improperly.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The invoice submitted by DoIT exactly reflects the annual budget
additional comments as allocation from DBM. The Department is given a fixed budget every
deemed necessary. year.
In the past, DAT has requested DoIT to enter into an MOU that would
stipulate the itemized breakdown of enterprise services provided by
DoIT. DoIT’s response was to provide four quarterly invoices based on
an allocated budget provided by the Department of Budget and
Management. DAT was therefore unable to verify propriety of charges
due to a lack of documentation from DoIT.
As of August 21. 2024 an updated MOU has been signed and plans for
execution are in place.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of DAT has worked in conjunction with the DoIT Portfolio Officer to
corrective action or update and execute a signed MOU that reflects information technology
explain disagreement. support services supplied to DAT, including the individual services to be
provided, and the related costs. The MOU will require DoIT to submit
up-to-date and timely documentation to support invoices submitted.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Page 15 of 17

--- Page 65 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DAT has worked with DoIT to execute an MOU that accurately
corrective action or represents the needs of the department. Going forward, DoIT will submit
explain disagreement. a projected remittance request to the Agency on or about May 31 of each
year, or no later than 30 days after delivery of the annual budget
allocation from DBM, based on agency service usage and quantities
agreed upon during the prior year's remittance process, showing
estimated costs for services DoIT will render in the upcoming fiscal
year. DoIT will discuss and confirm the Agency’s service usage and
quantities for the next fiscal year budget submission. The Department
and DoIT will annually review service usage between May and July to
confirm the level of the recurring services to which Agency subscribes
for incorporation into the following fiscal year’s budget submission.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of DAT will request an itemized invoice of actual services rendered from
corrective action or fiscal years 2021 to 2023. This will be reviewed alongside a Portfolio
explain disagreement. Officer to determine if any amounts have been billed inappropriately and
all efforts will be made to recover.
Page 16 of 17

--- Page 66 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
OLA has determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 9 and 10 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DAT’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 17 of 17

--- Page 67 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Johanna K. Bachman
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Tari J. Covington
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors