Title: Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
Date: 10/24/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=671bac0f1439b16f3339a2eb
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:11:12.029149
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
October 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 24, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Public
Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) for the period beginning June 18, 2019 and
ending June 30, 2023. MPBC is responsible for operating and maintaining a
system of regional and local facilities to provide educational and cultural
television and radio programs throughout the State. MPBC is also responsible for
the preparation, content, and presentation of such programs to the public.
During our audit, MPBC would not provide documentation of corrective action
taken to address concerns with its affiliated foundation in response to our
preceding audit report and a Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC) letter
of concern. As a result, we could not determine whether its policies and
procedures were modified to address the recommendations in our preceding report
and to incorporate best practices that it committed to in its written response to the
JAEC. Additionally, MPBC could not justify the diversion of approximately $1.3
million in State revenue to its affiliated foundation during fiscal years 2020
through 2023. According to MPBC’s audited financial statements, the affiliated
foundation received revenue from corporate underwriters and sponsors (including
State agencies) totaling $15.7 million during fiscal years 2020 through 2022.
Our audit also disclosed that MPBC continued to use the services of a vendor for
several years after the related contract had expired and did not adequately ensure
amounts invoiced by that vendor were proper. Additionally, MPBC did not
always comply with State procurement regulations for its non-exempt
procurements and intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements
including documenting bid openings and publishing contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, supervisory reviews of corporate purchasing card activity logs were
not always documented and did not use available Level-3 data to help ensure the
propriety of the purchases, as required. Also, MPBC did not segregate the cash
receipts and accounts receivable record duties, as required.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of four findings
contained in our preceding report. We determined that MPBC satisfactorily
addressed two of these findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this
report.
MPBC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while MPBC
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings related to activities of its affiliated foundation. In particular,
MPBC disagrees with a recommendation repeated from our prior report and a
subsequent letter of concern from the JAEC to monitor its independent affiliated
foundation.
In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included “auditor comments” within MPBC’s response to explain our position.
We will advise the JAEC of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
MPBC. Finally, there are other aspects of MPBC’s response which will require
further clarification, but we do not anticipate that these will require the JAEC’s
attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MPBC and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Organizational Change 6
Financial Statement Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Affiliated Foundation
* Finding 1 (Policy Issue) – The Maryland Public Broadcasting 10
Commission (MPBC) would not provide documentation to support
corrective action taken to address concerns with its affiliated
foundation in response to our preceding audit report recommendations
and a Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee letter of concern.
Finding 2 – MPBC could not justify the diversion of approximately $1.3 11
million in State revenue to the affiliated foundation during fiscal
years 2020 through 2023.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3 – MPBC continued to use the services of a vendor for several 13
years after the related contract had expired and did not adequately
ensure amounts invoiced were proper.
* Finding 4 – MPBC did not always comply with State procurement 14
regulations for its non-exempt procurements and intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements including documenting bid
openings and publishing contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage.
Corporate Purchasing Card
Finding 5 – Supervisory reviews of corporate purchasing card activity 15
logs were not always documented and did not use available Level-3
data to help ensure the propriety of the purchases, as required.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 6 – MPBC did not segregate the duties of cash receipts and 16
maintaining accounts receivable records, as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 18
Exhibit 1 – Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Letter of Concern 21
and MPBC Response
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) is responsible for
operating and maintaining a system of regional and local facilities to provide
educational and cultural television and radio programs throughout the State.
MPBC is also responsible for the preparation, content, and presentation of
programs for the public. MPBC operates six television stations located in
Annapolis, Baltimore, Frederick, Hagerstown, Oakland, and Salisbury. MPBC is
governed by an 11-member Commission whose members are appointed by the
Governor.
According to the State's records, during fiscal year 2023, MPBC's operating
expenditures totaled approximately $37.6 million (See Figure 1 on the following
page). These expenditures consisted of approximately $21 million in special
funds (primarily from viewer and corporate contributions), $11 million in State
general funds, and $5.2 million in reimbursable funds.
According to the Department of Budget and Management’s fiscal year 2024
Capital Budget White Book, MPBC had authorized capital improvement projects
with budgeted funds totaling approximately $12.7 million during the period from
July 2018 to June 2020. The projects were for replacing digital transmission and
broadcasting equipment, and for the renovation and expansion of its broadcasting
studio. According to the State records, capital expenditures totaled approximately
$19.8 million during fiscal years 2019 to 2023. The procurements related to this
activity were the responsibility of the Department of General Services and MPBC
was responsible for making the related payments. Accordingly, our review of this
activity was limited to ensuring the propriety of the payments.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
MPBC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 139 95.9%
Vacant 6 4.1%
Total 145
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $17,805,368 47.4%
Technical and Special Fees 840,694 2.2%
Operating Expenses 18,941,954 50.4%
Total $37,588,016
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $11,033,444 29.4%
Special Fund 20,990,220 55.8%
Federal Fund 392,063 1.0%
Reimbursable Fund 5,172,289 13.8%
Total $37,588,016
Source: State financial and personnel records
Organizational Change
Effective July 1, 2020, the Maryland State Ad Agency (MSAA), a division of
MPBC, was created to provide full-service advertising, marketing,
communications, and media buying for State agencies and related organizations.
Prior to July 1, 2020, these services were offered by MPBC in a limited capacity
within its Content Division. According to its records, during fiscal years 2021
through 2023, MSAA provided these services to 12 State agencies through
interagency agreements valued at approximately $20 million with related
expenditures totaling $15.1 million.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Financial Statement Audits
In compliance with the audit requirements established by the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting (a federally funded, nonprofit organization that provides
funds to MPBC as well as to other public broadcasting stations), MPBC engaged
an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the combined financial
statements of MPBC and the Maryland Public Television Foundation, Inc., an
affiliated nonprofit foundation.
In the related audit reports for fiscal years ended June 30, 2020, 2021, 2022, and
2023, the firm stated that the combined financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the assets, liabilities, and net assets of MPBC and the
Foundation as of the years then ended in accordance with Financial Reporting
Guidelines prescribed by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 25, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2 on the
following page, we determined that MPBC satisfactorily addressed two of these
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MPBC did not establish formal policies and procedures to
address revenue generating activities of its affiliated
foundation. MPBC also did not effectively monitor the Repeated
Finding 1
affiliated foundation and could not document that it (Current Finding 1)
received and reviewed conflict of interest disclosures for
foundation board members and officers.
MPBC policies and procedures were not sufficiently
comprehensive and certain critical provisions were not
approved by MPBC’s governing Commission. Our review
Repeated
Finding 2 disclosed that MPBC did not obtain approval for certain
(Current Finding 4)
exempt procurements and did not publish certain non-
exempt contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM)
as required.
MPBC did not obtain and review the required independent
control review for its fundraising services vendor and, as a
Finding 3 result, certain security concerns over fundraising data were Not repeated
not identified by MPBC and addressed with the vendor
timely.
MPBC had not performed, or did not adequately perform,
Finding 4 monthly reconciliations of its donor collections to its donor Not repeated
database for the period from August 2018 to August 2019.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Affiliated Foundation
Background
State law authorized the Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) to
create an affiliated foundation, which raises funds for the benefit of MPBC, in
exchange for public acknowledgment of donors and underwriters on MPBC’s
website and televised programming. According to MPBC’s audited financial
statements, the affiliated foundation received revenue from corporate underwriters
and sponsors (including State agencies) totaling $15.7 million during fiscal years
2020 through 2022 to specifically support MPBC’s activity. As of June 30, 2022,
only 50 percent had been transferred to MPBC with the remaining $7.8 million
maintained by the affiliated foundation for future MPBC and foundation
expenditures.
MPBC and the affiliated foundation are financially interrelated organizations.
During our preceding audit of MPBC, legal advice from counsel to the Maryland
General Assembly received in September 2019 concluded that the affiliated
foundation did not have to provide our Office with access to its records or
operations. However, in accordance with MPBC’s agreement with its affiliated
foundation, MPBC is allowed to grant auditors or other external entities access to
the foundation’s records.
Based on the level of integration between the affiliated foundation and MPBC
(MPBC employees maintained the records on behalf of the affiliated foundation
as delegated and the affiliated foundation reimbursed MPBC for its employees’
work), we requested MPBC grant us access or provide us certain foundation
financial records. In a similar manner to our preceding audits, MPBC again
denied us access to the requested records citing the affiliated foundation’s status
as an independent entity.
MPBC also denied us access to annual conflict of interest disclosures from its
affiliated foundation board members and officers. These disclosures were
required by MPBC’s Conflict of Interest Policy for Board of Directors and
Officers of Affiliated Foundations. Based on advice from counsel to the Maryland
General Assembly provided in March 2020, to the extent MPBC has received
notices of a potential conflict from foundation board members and officers under
the aforementioned Policy, State law allows our Office to access those records
(disclosures). The MPBC President advised us that none of the disclosures it
received during our audit period included potential conflicts and therefore none of
the related records were provided to our Office for review.
9

--- Page 12 ---
In response to the findings raised in our preceding report, the Maryland General
Assembly’s Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC) issued a letter of
concern to MPBC dated October 28, 2020 (see Exhibit 1). In the letter, the JAEC
requested the status of MPBC’s promised actions to resolve the findings in our
preceding audit report, including the affiliated foundation issue. On December 3,
2020, MPBC responded to the JAEC letter indicating that the recommended
actions had been taken and it would provide ongoing monitoring of the affiliated
foundation activities.
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
MPBC would not provide documentation to support corrective action taken
to address concerns with its affiliated foundation in response to our
preceding audit report recommendations and a JAEC letter of concern.
Analysis
MPBC would not provide documentation to support corrective action taken to
address concerns with its affiliated foundation in response to our preceding audit
and a JAEC letter of concern. Our preceding audit report noted several concerns
with MPBC’s relationship with its affiliated foundation including the following:
 MPBC did not establish formal policies and guidance to address the terms and
conditions of revenue generating activities of its affiliated foundation.
 MPBC had no procedures to address how the affiliated foundation collections
should be safeguarded, invested, and transferred to MPBC.
 MPBC had no formal guidelines governing the rates the affiliated foundation
charges for underwriting and sponsorship of MPBC programming.
 MPBC did not effectively monitor the affiliated foundation to ensure it
collected all amounts due from the sponsorship and underwriting agreements.
 MPBC did not document that it obtained and reviewed required annual
conflict of interest disclosures from its affiliated foundation board members
and officers.
In its June 17, 2020 response to the preceding report and its December 3, 2020
response to a subsequent letter of concern from the Maryland General Assembly’s
JAEC, MPBC indicated that it conducted a review of the affiliated foundation’s
policies, and was working with the affiliated foundation and its external auditors
to develop best practices for its revenue generating activities. MPBC also
committed to continually monitor the revenue generating activity to comply fully
with the spirit and letter of our preceding audit recommendations and document
its review of conflict of interest disclosures submitted by the foundation board
members and officers.
10

--- Page 13 ---
However, during our current audit, MPBC would not provide us with any
documentation of the aforementioned review and ongoing monitoring activities.
As a result, we could not determine whether the policies and procedures were
modified to address the recommendations in our preceding report and to
incorporate best practices that it committed to in its written response to the JAEC.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MPBC take corrective actions to address concerns and
implement best practices for its affiliated foundation. Specifically, we
recommend that MPBC document and retain for subsequent audit
verification the following:
a. a review of the affiliated foundation collections process including
procedures to safeguard, invest and timely transfer collections to MPBC
(repeat);
b. a review of the affiliated foundation procedures to control the terms of
underwriting and sponsorship agreements (repeat);
c. monitoring of revenue generating activities (repeat); and
d. receipt and review of the annual conflict of interest disclosures by its
affiliated foundation board members and officers (repeat).
Finding 2
MPBC could not justify the diversion of approximately $1.3 million in State
revenue to the affiliated foundation during fiscal years 2020 through 2023.
Analysis
MPBC could not justify the diversion of approximately $1.3 million in State
revenue to the affiliated foundation during fiscal years 2020 through 2023.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions.
 MPBC directed State agencies to pay its affiliated foundation for production
services provided by MPBC. According to State records, 15 State agencies
paid the affiliated foundation approximately $900,000 during fiscal years
2020 through 2023. We requested documentation from MPBC to justify why
the payments were made to the affiliated foundation, but MPBC denied us
access to the documentation citing the affiliated foundation’s status as an
independent entity. Therefore, we requested and obtained agreements from
one State agency that paid the affiliated foundation approximately $370,000
under 12 separate underwriting agreements to produce a television show.
These payments represented the most significant payments by the 15 State
agencies.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Our review of the agreements disclosed that MPBC provided the production
services for specific television programming, and the affiliated foundation
simply was the recipient of the funds paid by the State agency for those
services. Consequently, MPBC bypassed State budgetary oversight by
directing State agencies to pay the affiliated foundation instead of establishing
a special or reimbursable fund to budget and account for this revenue.
 MPBC could not document the basis for approximately $400,000 it paid to its
affiliated foundation during fiscal years 2020 through 2023. MPBC
management advised us that these payments were for advertisements aired on
MPBC's platform (such as, television and radio) and for media campaigns
produced by MPBC’s Maryland State Ad Agency (MSAA). MPBC believed
it was necessary for the affiliated foundation to be involved since it pays
commissions to foundation employees for negotiating the individual
advertisement placements on various platforms, including MPBC, even
though these advertising services were provided by MPBC. However, MPBC
could not provide documentation to support the amounts paid.
MPBC’s practice of diverting State funds to the affiliated foundation contradicts
the primary purpose of the General Foundation Guidelines of the affiliated
foundation, which is “to facilitate and support fund raising programs and
contributions from private sources to promote the general welfare of MPBC.”
Since funds from State agencies are public funds, we question the classification of
payments as “private sources” of fund raising. Additionally, by not depositing the
funds into a State controlled account (such as a reimbursable or special fund), the
funds were not transparent to budgetary oversight by the Department of Budget
and Management and the Maryland General Assembly.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MPBC
a. discontinue the practice of diverting State funds to its affiliated
foundation (for both funds State agencies pay directly to the foundation
and funds MPBC directly receives); and
b. recover the funds improperly diverted to the affiliated foundation for
deposit into a State controlled account (such as a reimbursable or special
fund) that is transparent to budgetary oversight by the Department of
Budget and Management and the Maryland General Assembly.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
MPBC continued to use the services of a vendor for several years after the
related contract had expired and did not adequately ensure amounts
invoiced were proper.
Analysis
MPBC continued to use the services of a vendor for several years after the related
contract had expired and did not adequately ensure that the amounts invoiced
were proper. MPBC orders premium gifts (such as, DVDs, CDs, and books) from
the vendor based on gifts selected by its donors. The vendor shipped the premium
gifts directly to the donors and invoiced MPBC for the items shipped. Our review
disclosed that the contract with the vendor expired on September 9, 2020, but
MPBC continued to use the vendor through June 2023. MPBC paid the vendor
approximately $1.1 million for services provided through June 2023, subsequent
to the contract expiration without a formal contract extension.
In addition, although MPBC reviewed and verified the invoiced costs for
premium gifts shipped on a test basis, it did not compare the number of premium
gifts billed by the vendor with its record of premium gifts ordered by donors.
Consequently, MPBC lacked assurance that the vendor only billed for gifts
ordered by MPBC’s donors. We tested three invoices totaling $110,800 for gifts
ordered between March 2021 and April 2023, and determined the cost of
premium gifts charged agreed to the cost quoted on the vendor’s price list. We
also compared the number of premium gifts billed by the vendor with the record
of premium gifts ordered by donors and did not note any discrepancies. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that agencies
ensure vendor invoices agree with the related contract.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MPBC
a. procure a new contract for premium gifts and discontinue using the
services of a vendor after a contract has expired; and
b. ensure, at least on a test basis, that it compares the number of premium
gifts billed by the vendor with its record of premium gifts ordered by
donors.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 4
MPBC did not always comply with State procurement regulations for its
non-exempt procurements and intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements including documenting bid openings and publishing contract
awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage.
Analysis
MPBC did not always comply with State procurement regulations for its non-
exempt procurements and its Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing
Agreements (ICPA) including documenting bid openings and publishing contract
awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA).1 According to MPBC
records, during the period June 2019 to June 2023, MPBC procured 16 non-
exempt contracts valued at approximately $1.6 million and 2 ICPAs valued at
$5.8 million. Our review of five contracts totaling $6.4 million (three non-exempt
contracts totaling $600,000 and two ICPAs totaling $5.8 million) procured
between February 2021 and October 2022, disclosed the following conditions.
 MPBC did not document the bid opening process for two non-exempt contract
awards tested totaling $547,000. Specifically, MPBC could not document that
at least two State employees were present to witness the bid openings or
document that the bids were opened publicly as required.
 MPBC did not publish any of these five contract awards on eMMA as
required. Publishing awards on eMMA provides improved transparency over
State procurements including information about winning bidders and the
amount of the related awards.
State procurement regulations require documentation that bids are opened with at
least two employees present or publicly. The regulations further require awards
to be published on eMMA within 30 days after approval of the contract.
Additionally, the Department of General Services’ Maryland Procurement
Manual requires that ICPA awards be published on eMMA within 30 days after
approval of the contract.
A similar condition regarding the failure to publish contract awards was
commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response to that report, MPBC
agreed that it would publish contract awards on eMMA by Spring 2020.
However, as noted above it did not take the corrective action as stated and we
were advised by MPBC management that this was an oversight.
1 eMMA is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the Department of
General Services.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MPBC comply with State procurement regulations and
the Maryland Procurement Manual for its non-exempt procurements and
ICPAs. Specifically, we recommend that MPBC
a. document bid openings by at least two employees; and
b. publish contract awards on eMMA as required, including the
aforementioned contract awards (repeat).
Corporate Purchasing Card
Finding 5
Supervisory reviews of corporate purchasing card (CPC) activity logs were
not always documented and did not use available Level-3 data to help ensure
the propriety of the purchases, as required.
Analysis
Supervisory reviews of CPC activity logs were not always documented and did
not use available Level-3 data to help ensure the propriety of the purchases, as
required. According to State records, during the period from July 2, 2018 through
April 24, 2023, MPBC processed 14,959 CPC transactions totaling approximately
$4.4 million.
 Supervisory reviews of CPC activity logs were not always documented as
required. Specifically, our review of 18 transactions totaling approximately
$59,200 disclosed that for 9 transactions totaling $29,300, there was no
evidence of supervisory review. For example, the cardholder CPC activity log
that included a purchase of computers totaling $7,800 was not signed by a
supervisor as being reviewed and approved. For the 9 transactions without
supervisory review, the total transactions on the related CPC activity logs
totaled $113,000. Our review of the 9 transactions disclosed that they
appeared to be reasonable.
 Supervisory reviews of monthly CPC activity logs did not use available
Level-3 data to ensure the propriety of the purchases as required. Level-3
data, which is reported by certain merchants, consist of detailed descriptions
of items purchased and provide supervisors with additional information to
help detect questionable purchases. During the period from July 2, 2018
through April 24, 2023, we determined that Level-3 data were available for
3,754 of MPBC’s CPC transactions totaling approximately $1.2 million.
Based on our review of the available Level-3 data, we did not identify any
questionable purchase descriptions.
15

--- Page 18 ---
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual requires agencies to perform a documented supervisory
review of monthly CPC cardholder activity logs and transactions. The Manual
further requires agencies to verify Level-3 data to CPC activity logs and
document monthly reviews of Level-3 data as part of transaction monitoring.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MPBC comply with the Manual by
a. performing a documented independent supervisory review for the
propriety of all CPC purchases, and
b. ensuring supervisors use available Level-3 data as part of the monthly
review to aid in the assessment of the propriety of purchases and
payments.
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
MPBC did not segregate the duties of cash receipts and maintaining accounts
receivable records, as required.
Analysis
MPBC did not segregate duties of processing cash receipts and maintaining
accounts receivable records, as required. Specifically, the employee who received
and processed cash receipts for deposit was also responsible for posting the
related collections to accounts receivable records. Consequently, there is a risk
that collections could be misappropriated without being readily detected. Our test
of 10 collections received between August 2021 to April 2023 totaling
approximately $4.6 million disclosed that the related deposits were made intact,
and payments were properly posted to the related account receivable record.
According to MPBC’s records, collections received in fiscal year 2023 totaled
approximately $6.5 million, of which $5.4 million were collections associated
with an accounts receivable record. MPBC accepts checks and cash for donations
to Maryland Public Television, as well as payments for advertising services and
cell tower rentals. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures
Manual requires segregation of the cash receipts handling duties from accounts
receivable record functions.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MPBC properly segregate the duties of processing cash
receipts and maintaining accounts receivable records.
We advised MBPC how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Public
Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) for the period beginning June 18, 2019 and
ending June 30, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MPBC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, payroll, revenue
and cash receipts, accounts receivable, and corporate purchasing cards. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in MPBC’s preceding audit report.
MPBC engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the
combined financial statements of MPBC and the Maryland Public Television
Foundation, Inc. Based on significance and risk, we reviewed the financial
statements for fiscal years 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023. In the related audit
reports, the firm stated that the combined financial statements presented fairly, in
all material respects, the assets, liabilities, and net assets of MPBC and the
Foundation, as of June 30 for the years then ended in accordance with Financial
Reporting Guidelines prescribed by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. Our
reliance on these audits was limited to information for background information
purposes.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MPBC’s operations. Generally,
18

--- Page 21 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data), as well as
from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
(credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MPBC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MPBC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
19

--- Page 22 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MPBC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Finally, this report
includes a finding, which is identified as a “Policy Issue”. Such findings
represent significant operational or financial-related issues for which formal
criteria may not necessarily exist, and for which management has significant
discretion in addressing, but the recommendation represents prudent and/or
practical actions, which we believe should be implemented by the agency to
improve outcomes. Other less significant findings were communicated to MPBC
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MPBC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MPBC regarding the
results of our review of its response.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Exhibit 1
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Letter of Concern and MPBC Response
THE MARYLAND GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
ANNAPOLIS, MARYLAND 21401-1991
JOINT AUDIT AND EVALUATION COMMITTEE
October 28, 2020
Mr. Larry D. Unger
President and CEO, Maryland Public Television
11767 Owings Mills Boulevard
Owings Mills, Maryland 21117-1499
Dear President Unger:
A primary responsibility of the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee is to review audit
reports issued by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA). The committee’s review of the June 2020
fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) indicates that
additional monitoring is warranted due to the nature and significance of the findings. Among the
audit findings:
• MPBC did not establish formal policies and procedures to address revenue generating
activities of its affiliated foundation. MPBC also did not effectively monitor the affiliated
foundation and could not document that it received and reviewed the conflict of interest
disclosures for foundation board members and officers. The audit report included a number
of recommendations regarding the comprehensiveness of the agreement between MPBC’s
affiliated foundation and MPBC and regarding the adequacy of the procedures to ensure
and document that potential or actual conflicts of interest were identified and properly
resolved.
• MPBC disagreed with the analysis and recommendations of this finding based
primarily on the premise that the foundation is an independent legal entity.
Notwithstanding that disagreement, MPBC has indicated to OLA that it will
(1) review the policies of the foundation to determine if any new ones need to
be created; (2) continually monitor the foundation’s revenue generating activities;
and (3) document the receipt and review of the annual conflict of interest
disclosures by foundation board members and officers.
• OLA advises, considering the significant revenue provided to MPBC by the
foundation from corporate underwriters and sponsors, that MPBC needs to ensure
21

--- Page 24 ---
Exhibit 1
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Letter of Concern and MPBC Response
Mr. Larry D. Unger
October 28, 2020
Page 2
that comprehensive and appropriate documented oversight of the foundation’s
activities is in place. The audit report highlighted areas where MPBC’s policies and
procedures could be enhanced for that purpose.
• MPBC’s procurement policies and procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive and
certain critical provisions were not approved by MPBC’s governing commission. In
addition, MPBC did not obtain approval for certain exempt procurements and did not
publish certain nonexempt contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
• MPBC did not obtain and review the required independent control review of its fundraising
service vendors and, as a result, certain security concerns over fundraising data were not
identified by MPBC and addressed with the vendor in a timely fashion.
• MPBC had either not performed or did not adequately perform monthly reconciliations of
its donor collections to its donor database for the period from August 2018 to August 2019.
The committee requests that you review this audit report and ascertain whether the
recommendations have been or will be promptly implemented and that an ongoing monitoring
process exists to help ensure that the corrective action remains in place.
Please provide the committee with a report by December 1, 2020, that outlines the status
of implementation of all fiscal/compliance recommendations in the audit report – including
progress made on promised actions related to MPBC’s affiliated foundation. Also, please advise
the committee as to what specific monitoring procedures were established to help ensure that
recommendations will be implemented and will remain implemented.
The committee intends to closely monitor agency implementation of audit
recommendations throughout State government. Implementation will improve accountability and
control over State resources, enhance compliance with laws and regulations, and make State
programs more effective. Thank you for your cooperation.
Sincerely,
Senator Clarence K. Lam Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senate Chair House Chair
CKL:CLK/EJA/dw
cc: Members, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Mr. Gregory A. Hook
22

--- Page 25 ---
Exhibit 1
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Letter of Concern and MPBC Response
23

--- Page 26 ---
Exhibit 1
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Letter of Concern and MPBC Response
24

--- Page 27 ---
APPENDIX
11767 OWINGS MILLS BLVD T 410.581.4111 F 410.581.6579
MARYLAND PUBLIC TELEVISION OWINGS MILLS MD 21117-1499 WWW.MPT.ORG
LARRY D. UNGER
PRESIDENT & CEO
September 30, 2024
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Maryland Office of Legislative Audits
Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 W. Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Attached please find the agency response from the Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission.
Please let me know if I can be of further assistance.
Sincer ly,
d.:_ 'I � -� .
Larry D. Unger
President & CEO
Maryland Public Television

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Affiliated Foundation
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
MPBC would not provide documentation of corrective action taken to address concerns
with its affiliated foundation in response to our preceding audit report recommendations
and a JAEC letter of concern.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MPBC take corrective actions to address concerns and implement
best practices for its affiliated foundation. Specifically, we recommend that MPBC
document and retain for subsequent audit verification the following:
a. a review of the affiliated foundation collections process including procedures to
safeguard, invest and timely transfer of collections to MPBC (repeat);
b. a review of the affiliated foundation procedures to control the terms of underwriting
and sponsorship agreements (repeat);
c. monitoring of revenue generating activities (repeat); and
d. receipt and review of the annual conflict of interest disclosures by its affiliated
foundation board members and officers (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please explain any Access to Records of Affiliated Foundation
concerns with factual
accuracy. At its core, Finding 1, rests upon the OLA’s continued attempts to gain
access to the books and records of the MPT Foundation, Inc. (the
“Foundation”), a foundation affiliated with MPBC organized as a
501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation in accordance with the authority of Md.
Education Article § 24-207 (b)(1). Although the OLA concedes that it has
been advised by the legal counsel to the General Assembly that the
Foundation is not required to provide the OLA with access to its records
or operations, the OLA asserts that MPBC could allow the OLA access to
these Foundation materials. This is incorrect.
OLA’s authority to access records in connection with an audit is found in
State Government Article (“SG”) § 2-1223. In conducting an audit, OLA
shall “have access to and may inspect the records, including those that are
confidential by law, of any unit of the State government or of a person or
other body receiving State funds, with respect to any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Office of Legislative Audits,” except as prohibited by
the Internal Revenue Code. SG § 2-1223(a)(1) (emphasis added).
Page 1 of 17

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
In addition to the 2019 legal advice cited in the OLA’s background
information in Finding 1, the Office of the Attorney General has
repeatedly advised the OLA that State law does not allow the OLA to
access records of foundations affiliated with State entities, since such a
foundation is not a “unit” of State Government and does not receive any
State funds. See 77 Opinions of the Attorney General 88, 96-97 (1992)
(noting that the records of a private fundraising foundation affiliated with
a public university that does not receive State money are inaccessible by
OLA, notwithstanding that it raises money or otherwise generates revenue
for the university); Letter from AAG Robert A. Zarnoch to Mr. Charles C.
Piazza, Deputy Legislative Auditor, October 9, 1980 (concluding that
State law does not authorize OLA to obtain private audit records of the
Morgan State Foundation, Inc.).
The OLA’s statement that MPBC could still provide access to the
Foundation’s books and records ignores the fact that, though MPBC and
the Foundation share facilities, and as permitted by MPBC’s enabling
legislation, certain staff, the books and records of the Foundation are
maintained separately from those of MPBC. The Foundation books and
records are simply not those of MPBC; only the Foundation, which is
governed by a separate and independent board of directors, can agree to
grant such access. MPBC is not the parent of the Foundation; as Md.
Education Article §24-207 clearly contemplates, the Foundation is
affiliated, not controlled, by MPBC. MPBC cannot direct the Foundation
to comply with the OLA’s request for the Foundations books and records
without jeopardizing the corporate separateness of the Foundation.
Affiliated Foundation Conflict of Interest Policy
There are certain aspects of the Foundation’s operations over which
MPBC is statutorily required to exercise a degree of control pursuant to its
enabling legislation. The Foundation is required to “operate subject to
policies adopted by the Commission.” Md. Education Article §24-207
(b)(2)(i). MPBC has complied with this statutory requirement by adopting
guidelines governing MPBC’s relationship with affiliated foundations (the
“General Foundation Guidelines”), and the Foundation has agreed to
abide by these General Foundation Guidelines in the agreement between
MPBC and the Foundation (the “Foundation Agreement”). MPBC has
also adopted a Conflicts of Interest Policy for Boards of Directors and
Officers of Affiliated Foundations (the “COI Policy”), which any
foundation affiliated with MPBC is required to operate and which, as
required by Md. Education Article §24-207 (b)(2)(ii), has been reviewed
and approved by the State Ethics Commission.”
Page 2 of 17

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Pursuant to the COI Policy, the Foundation’s board members and officers
are required to complete a questionnaire on an annual basis (the “COI
Disclosure Forms”). These COI Disclosure Forms are submitted to the
Foundation and maintained in the files of the Foundation. As such, the
COI Disclosure Forms constitute records of the Foundation, which, as
explained in detail above, are not subject to disclosure to or audit by the
OLA.
The statement that MPBC did not provide the OLA with access to the COI
Disclosure Forms is correct. The Foundation’s process for COI Disclosure
Forms is as follows:
 Every Foundation board member completes a COI Disclosure
Form at the beginning of each calendar year.
 These COI Disclosure Forms are reviewed upon receipt.
 At present, the Foundation has had no conflicts of interest to report
to MPBC. Therefore, as there were no conflicts disclosed to
MPBC, there was nothing MPBC could provide to the OLA.
MPBC agrees with the statement in Finding 1 that “to the extent MPBC
has received notices of potential conflict from foundation board members
and officers under the [COI Policy],” the OLA would be entitled to
documentation of such potential conflicts.
Auditor’s Comment: MPBC disagrees with the factual accuracy of the Analysis based
primarily on the inference that only records obtained directly from its affiliated
foundation would provide sufficient documentation of its monitoring efforts. As noted in
our preceding and current audit report findings, OLA does not dispute the independence
of MPBC’s affiliated foundation. As such, the basis of the preceding report finding, the
subsequent letter of concern from the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC), and
the current report finding continues to be MPBC’s ability to provide evidence that it is
monitoring its affiliated foundation. The standard to monitor the affiliated foundation is
no different than the standard for an agency to monitor any independent entity doing
business with the agency (such as, a contractor or grantee).
Our current report finding was focused on our inability to document that MPBC
implemented the oversight described in its response to the JAEC. Specifically, MPBC’s
December 3, 2020 response to the JAEC stated that it agreed to cooperate fully with the
spirit and the letter of our audit and conduct a review of the affiliated foundation’s
policies, developing best practices for its revenue generating activities and monitoring the
revenue generating activities. As noted in the finding, we attempted to obtain
documentation to support MPBC’s efforts, but MPBC would not provide us with any
Page 3 of 17

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
documentation and accordingly, we could not verify if MPBC took the actions described
in its response to the JAEC.
Based on the information above, we continue to believe our finding is both accurate and
appropriate, and that our recommendations will provide the necessary transparency and
accountability over MPBC financial activities, including those arising from its financial
transactions made with, or on its behalf by, the independent affiliated foundation.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion
6/30/25
Date:
Please provide details MPBC has begun the process of reviewing the Foundation Agreement to
of corrective action or determine what, if any, updates are required. As part of this review,
explain disagreement. MPBC is also reviewing the appropriate structure for policies and
procedures detailing the timing of the transfer of money from the
Foundation to MPBC.
It should be noted as to Recommendation 1a, however, that the
Foundation itself already employs practices for the safeguarding and
investment of funds held by the Foundation. The Foundation has
established polices and defined standards for risk tolerance and
recommended deployment of investments.
The General Foundation Guidelines provide that a foundation associated
with MPBC should be established as a 501(c)(3) organization and shall be
a separate legal entity from MPBC. The Foundation was established as
such and operates pursuant to these General Foundation Guidelines, its
charter and bylaws, Business Procedures, a Statement of Investment
Policies and Objectives (the “Investment Policy”), and the Foundation
Agreement.
The General Foundation Guidelines provide that one of the purposes of
the Foundation is to accumulate funds to be invested and to utilize the
principal and income thereof for activities that enhance and further the
mission of MPBC. It is the responsibility of the Foundation to abide by
the policies for investment of Foundation assets. To that end, the
Foundation board has adopted an Investment Policy, which is reviewed
and updated by the Foundation board, its Investment Committee, and an
investment advisor retained by the Foundation. The Investment Policy is
designed to ensure that the Foundation exercises prudent judgement in the
management of the Foundation assets to support MPBC.
Under the Investment Policy, an Investment Committee of the Foundation
is responsible for directing and monitoring the investment management of
Page 4 of 17

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
the Foundation assets, and an investment advisor engaged by the
Foundation has discretionary investing authority and provides quarterly
performance and Investment Policy compliance reporting to the
Investment Committee. This structure is typical in the industry for the
investment of assets, and MPBC believes that it is more than sufficient to
ensure the safeguarding and investment of Foundation assets.
The funds donated to the Foundation (i.e., via underwriting, sponsorships,
and other private donations) are held by the Foundation. These
Foundation assets are eligible for disbursement to MPBC upon the
presentation of an invoice from MPBC to fund MPBC’s operational,
programming, and other project costs.
As noted above, MPBC has already begun the process of reviewing the
polices of the Foundation and other relevant policies and procedures and
determine what, if any, changes may be necessary. In this regard, it
should be noted again that because the Foundation and MPBC are distinct
legal entities and certain of the procedures employed by the Foundation
for its safeguarding and investment of assets relate to the day-to-day
operations of the Foundation, it may not be appropriate for MPBC to
dictate the processes employed by the Foundation. Although, as stated in
the notes to MPBC’s audited financial statements, MPBC and the
Foundation are financially inter-related, it is of paramount importance that
the legal separateness of the two entities is maintained. If MPBC were to
exert control over the Foundation board’s decision making, the
Foundation could be subject to claims that it is merely an “alter ego” of
MPBC, which, in turn, raises concerns of piercing the corporate veil.
Recommendation 1b Disagree Estimated Completion
Date:
Please provide details The underwriting and sponsorship agreements are negotiated and entered
of corrective action or into by the Foundation. The Foundation maintains records of the
explain disagreement. arrangements, including the specific terms of such arrangements (e.g.,
amount of underwriting commitment, program being underwritten,
payment schedule for the underwriting commitment). Standardization of
the terms of underwriting and sponsorship agreements is contrary to the
nature of the public television business. As challenging as it is to attract
sponsorships or underwriting, the Foundation would be operating at a
distinct disadvantage if it were to use some sort of standardized pricing for
underwriting. Each underwriting transaction is as unique as the program
that is being produced, and these transactions are negotiated at arm’s
length by the Foundation and a potential underwriter.
Page 5 of 17

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
The broad spectrum of programs offered by MPBC (e.g., Motorweek,
Maryland Farm & Harvest, Chesapeake Collectibles, Becoming Frederick
Douglass, and Harriett Tubman: Visions of Freedom) are vastly different
from one another, with different production timelines, different budgets,
different audiences, and different distributors (i.e., PBS, APT, or MPT). A
uniform approach simply does not work for a public media organization.
Auditor’s Comment: MPBC disagrees with our recommendation stating that the
affiliated foundation would be operating at a distinct disadvantage if standardized pricing
was implemented. Given the significance of these agreements to fund MPBC
programming, we believe that MPBC should document its review of affiliated foundation
procedures to control the terms of underwriting and sponsorship agreements.
Page 6 of 17

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1c Disagree Estimated Completion
Date:
Please provide details All revenue contracts (e.g., underwriting and sponsorship agreements)
of corrective action or between donors and the Foundation are reviewed for compliance with
explain disagreement. FCC, PBS and MPT guidelines. These revenue-generating activities and
agreements are also reviewed by the Foundation representative assigned to
the activity or client and then approved by senior management of the
Foundation. Further, the independent certified public accounting firm
engaged by the Foundation to perform its financial audit during the
legislative audit period also prepared the agreed-upon procedures report
(the “AUP Report”) describing the independent auditor’s review of the
procedures set forth in COMAR .01.02.04.20-1C.
This review and the resultant AUP Report included a review of a sample
of the Foundation’s revenue transactions. The AUP Report, which was
included in the annual report filed with the Maryland Secretary of State,
did not include any recommendations for corrective action with respect to
the processes covered by the AUP Report. Therefore, MPBC does not
believe that any changes to the Foundation processes with respect to
revenue-generating activity are necessary or appropriate.
Auditor’s Comment: MPBC disagrees with our recommendation stating that the
revenue-generating activities of the affiliated foundation are subject to review by an
independent accounting firm performing agreed-upon procedure reviews. However,
MPBC would not provide any documentation of these reviews citing the independence of
the affiliated foundation. As a result, we could not verify the adequacy of the agreed-
upon procedure reviews.
Page 7 of 17

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion
6/30/25
Date:
Please provide details To the extent a conflict was to be disclosed to MPBC in the COI
of corrective action or Disclosure Forms, MPBC agrees that the OLA would be entitled to
explain disagreement. information with respect to such conflict, including the disclosure to
MPBC from the Foundation, and MPBC would provide such information.
To be clear, there were no conflicts disclosed to the Foundation on the
COI Disclosure Forms submitted to the Foundation by the Foundation
board members. Therefore, there was nothing MPBC could provide to the
OLA.
However, in an effort to alleviate the OLA’s continued concern with this
issue, we have determined that upon review of the annual COI Disclosures
Forms, a written memorandum indicating if any conflicts exist, including
instances where no such conflicts exist, will be prepared for MPBC to
document such review, and the memorandum will be retained in MPBC’s
records. The OLA will have access to these confirmatory memoranda in
future audit periods.
Page 8 of 17

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MPBC could not justify the diversion of approximately $1.3 million in State revenue to the
affiliated foundation during fiscal years 2020 through 2023.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MPBC
a. discontinue the practice of diverting State funds to its affiliated foundation (for both
funds State agencies pay directly to the foundation and funds MPBC receives), and
b. recover the funds improperly diverted to the affiliated foundation for deposit into a
State controlled account (such as, a reimbursable or special fund) that is transparent to
budgetary oversight by the Department of Budget and Management and the Maryland
General Assembly.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please explain any MPBC disagrees with and objects to the use of the term “divert” to
concerns with factual describe the flow of funds between itself and the Foundation, as such
accuracy. terminology suggests an intent to conceal or bypass the State budgetary
process and oversight. MPBC rejects the categorization of the transfer of
funds between itself and the Foundation as a “diversion.” To be clear,
MPBC did not divert State funds to the Foundation.
During the audit period and in accordance with the Foundation
Agreement, the Foundation transferred a total of $7.5 million to MPBC.
The balance of the funds that are held by the Foundation are subject to
investment pursuant to the Foundation’s Investment Policy and
transferred to MPBC at the point at which MPBC requires the use of
such funds for, among other things, production costs and expenses. A
portion of retained funds are used to support the Foundation’s
operations, including the payment of compensation to the Foundation’s
employees.
In calculating the $1.3 million referenced in Finding 2, the OLA is
conflating two distinct contractual arrangements: (1) MPBC contracts
with Maryland State entities for advertising, marketing,
communications, and media buying through Maryland State Ad Agency,
a division of MPBC (“MSAA”); and (2) underwriting agreements
between the Foundation and other entities, including Maryland State
entities, for the support of specific Maryland Public Television on-air
programming.
Certain of the underwriting agreements should not have been included in
the OLA’s calculation of the $1.3 million it contends MPBC improperly
Page 9 of 17

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
transferred to the Foundation. The OLA included $642,400 in funds paid
to the Foundation by 501(c)(3) organizations pursuant to underwriting
agreements between these non-State entities and the Foundation.
Subtracting the dollar value of these underwriting agreements between
the Foundation and these 501(c)(3) organizations from the OLA’s $1.3
million total, MPBC can only identify $745,840, consisting of (a)
$509,500 paid by Maryland State entities to the Foundation under valid
underwriting agreements, and (b) $236,340 transferred from MPBC to
the Foundation pursuant sponsorship agreements between MPBC and
the Foundation and related to the payment for placement of media on
Maryland Public Television by Foundation employees.
Inter-Agency Memoranda of Understanding with Maryland State
Entities: $236, 240
In the first category of agreements, a Maryland State entity submits
payment to MPBC pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in an
Inter-Agency Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) between MPBC
and the Maryland State entity. The MOU includes a statement of work
which details the services MSAA is obligated to provide under the
MOU. These services include, inter alia, the production of commercial
advertising spots for the Maryland State entity and media placement of
such spots. An MOU also includes a project budget detailing the media
buys and other costs associated with the contracted project.
The bulk of the funds paid to MPBC/MSAA pursuant to an MOUs is for
the work MSAA performs directly for the Maryland State entity.
However, a small portion (approximately 10%) of the MOU price
represents compensation to the Foundation for the placement of spots on
Maryland Public Television. These placements are made by Foundation
employees who serve as account executives. MPBC/MSAA does not
charge a placement fee for the placement of spots on Maryland Public
Television; however, the account executives employed by the
Foundation do receive a commission for the media placement in
accordance with commission rates standard in the industry. The payment
for this compensation by MPBC to the Foundation is made pursuant to a
sponsorship agreement between MPBC and the Foundation.
For the funds to be paid to MPBC pursuant to these MOUs, MPBC has
established special and reimbursable funds for billing and collection
under the MOUs for services performed by MPBC/MSAA. These funds
are accounted for in the State FMIS and deposited into a State-controlled
account of record, less a portion of such MOU payments used to cover
the administrative costs for the Foundation’s activities.
Page 10 of 17

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
The $236,340 transferred from MPBC to the Foundation represents the
amount MPBC paid to the Foundation for the placement of the above-
referenced spots on Maryland Public Television in connection with the
services rendered by MSAA under MOUs. The transfers themselves
were made pursuant to the sponsorship agreements between MPBC and
the Foundation. In order for MPBC to transfer these funds to the
Foundation, MPBC requires substantiation of the amounts to be
transferred (i.e., the aforementioned sponsorship agreements and
documentation of the commissions for media placement by Foundation
employees).
Underwriting Agreements – Foundation and Maryland State Entities:
$509,500
MPBC is not a party to the underwriting agreements. These agreements
are agreements between the Foundation and Maryland State entities
pursuant to which a Maryland State entity agrees to make a donation to
the Foundation to support the production and broadcast of specific
programming (e.g., Maryland Farm & Harvest). Underwriting
agreements with Maryland State entities represented $509,500 during the
audit period. It appears that these are the agreements OLA obtained
directly from certain Maryland State entities. However, as explained in
detail in response to the OLA’s Finding 1 analysis, the books and
records of the Foundation are not subject to audit by the OLA.
To be clear, the funds payable by Maryland State and private entities to
the Foundation are paid directly to the Foundation and held by the
Foundation until such funds are required for the production being
underwritten. The timeframe for how long the Foundation has
historically held these funds depends on the production being
underwritten as well as the payment schedule associated with a
particular sponsorship agreement. Ongoing production of series such as
Maryland Farm & Harvest and Outdoors Maryland are going to have
different timelines for fund transfers to MPBC than long-form
documentaries such as Becoming Frederick Douglass and Harriett
Tubman: Visions of Freedom, which were feature films in production for
several years (with transfers from the Foundation to MPBC to support
these productions occurring across fiscal years). Much of the funds that
are transferred is attributable to the payment of salary and benefits for
the staffing (e.g., writers, producers, directors, editors, actors and other
artists, videographers and other technicians) of the different productions.
The level of staffing on different productions is necessarily affected by
the type of production. The resultant timeline differences are directly
related to any lag in the movement of underwriting funds from the
Foundation to MPBC in any given year. As indicated above under our
Page 11 of 17

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
response to Recommendation 1a, the funds paid into the Foundation are
transferred to MPBC upon presentation of an invoice for such transfer,
subject to the Foundation’s retention of an amount sufficient to support
its operations and administrative expenses.
Auditor’s Comment: While MPBC agrees with our recommendation, it disagrees with
our use of the term “diversion” in the analysis and does not agree that $1.3 million
represents the total dollar amount of the described activities. In regard to the term
‘diversion’, we continue to believe this term is appropriate since MPBC could not support
the basis for directing State agencies to send payments to the affiliated foundation for
activities managed by MPBC. In regard to the total dollar amount of $1.3 million, as
noted in the finding, this amount is based on State accounting records. Furthermore,
MPBC was provided an opportunity during and subsequent to the audit to document the
figures referenced in its response, however MPBC provided us with internal records
instead of State accounting records. Given the conflicting dollar amounts and lack of a
sufficient explanation, we continue to believe the $1.3 million amount noted in the
finding is accurate.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of Although MPBC continues to object to the OLA’s categorization of the
corrective action or flow of funds into the Foundation as a diversion. However, MPBC
explain disagreement. recognizes the OLA’s concerns with funds from Maryland State entities
being paid to the Foundation. Although MPBC believes these transfers
were proper and appropriately documented, MPBC has determined that
it should reconsider the current structure to eliminate these transfers
when funds are paid by Maryland State entities. MPBC agrees to
prospectively restructure its processes as they relate to MOUs and
underwriting arrangements with Maryland State entities such that (a)
MPBC will no longer use the Foundation sponsorship agreement
structure to transfer funds from MPBC to the Foundation; and (b)
underwriting funds from Maryland State entities will be paid directly to
MPBC. MPBC can implement the restructuring of certain aspects of the
current structure immediately. However, MPBC requires time to fully
consider the impact these structural changes will have on MPBC and the
Foundation. Therefore, MPBC anticipates that the restructuring itself can
be made on or before the beginning of the FY2026.
Recommendation 2b Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Page 12 of 17

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Although MPBC agrees to prospectively restructure its processes as they
corrective action or relate to funds paid to it and the Foundation by Maryland State entities,
explain disagreement. there is no reason for the Foundation to transfer funds back to MPBC.
The $236,240 transferred from MPBC to the Foundation pursuant to
sponsorship agreements were properly transferred to the Foundation.
Prior to initiating these transfers, MPBC required and received
supporting documentation substantiating the validity of the amounts to
be transferred. Copies of the supporting documentation for these
sponsorship contract-related transfers were provided to the OLA during
the audit process.
The $509,500 donated directly to the Foundation pursuant to
underwriting agreements were properly paid to the Foundation pursuant
to valid contracts to which MPBC is not a party. The funds paid by
sponsors in support of a particular production are held by the Foundation
until such time as the funds are required for the production, at which
time they are transferred to MPBC pursuant to MPBC’s agreement with
the Foundation.
To require the Foundation to transfer $745,840 (the portion of the $1.3
million identified by the OLA that is associated with funds paid by
Maryland State entities) would be superfluous given that the Foundation
is regularly transferring much higher amounts to MPBC (i.e., $7.5
million during the audit period) to support the operations and
productions of MPBC.
MPBC agrees to prospectively (a) discontinue the transfer of funds from
MPBC to the Foundation in connection with MOUs; and (b) restructure
the underwriting arrangements with Maryland State entities such that
funds from these Maryland State entities are paid directly to MPBC.
Auditor’s Comment: MPBC disagrees with our recommendation stating that there is no
reason for the affiliated foundation to transfer the funds identified in the analysis back to
MPBC because the affiliated foundation is regularly transferring much higher amounts to
MPBC. However, as explained in the finding, the amounts identified are State funds that
should not have been diverted to the affiliated foundation, and accordingly should be
returned to MPBC for deposit into a State controlled account.
Page 13 of 17

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
MPBC continued to use the services of a vendor for several years after the related contract
had expired and did not adequately ensure amounts invoiced were proper.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MPBC
a. procure a new contract for premium gifts and discontinue the practice of paying a
vendor after a contract has been expired and
b. ensure, at least on a test basis, that it compares the number of premium gifts billed by
the vendor with its record of premium gifts ordered by donors.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MPBC entered into a new contract for premium gifts with the vendor in
corrective action or February 2024. MPBC provided OLA with a copy of this contract during
explain disagreement. the OLA audit process.
Effective July 1, 2024, MPBC also implemented a quarterly review of all
contracts set to expire. This review will allow MPBC to forecast the
need for new procurements or contract modifications/amendments to
extend contract end dates, as appropriate under Maryland procurement
law, in cases where MPBC continues to require the goods and services
provided under such contracts.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The contracts between MPBC and the vendor require it to submit
corrective action or invoices to MPBC that reflect, among other things, the amount invoiced
explain disagreement. and the basis for the billing. Effective July 1, 2024, MPBC instituted a
process for testing the premium gifts billed by the vendor with MPBC’s
record of premiums gifts ordered by donors.
Page 14 of 17

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
MPBC did not always comply with State procurement regulations for its non-exempt
procurements and intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements including
documenting bid openings and publishing contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MPBC comply with State procurement regulations and the Maryland
Procurement Manual for its non-exempt procurements and ICPAs. Specifically, we
recommend that MPBC
a. document bid openings by at least two employees; and
b. publish contract awards on eMMA as required (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Effective July 1, 2024, MPBC implemented a process pursuant to which
corrective action or two State employees are present at bid openings. These employees are
explain disagreement. tasked with witnessing bid proposal openings. MPBC staff will create an
automated calendar invite for each procurement bid opening and ensure
that at least two (2) State employees are included on the calendar invite.
A bid tab form will then be generated, reviewed, and signed by both
State employees present at the bid opening in order to accurately
document results, time and date of the bid opening. The bid tab will be
scanned and be retained in the procurement file.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MPBC’s procurement office will publish contract awards on eMMA as
corrective action or required by the Maryland Procurement Delegation of Authority. To
explain disagreement. accomplish this, effective July 1, 2024, MPBC created a new
procurement file checklist that includes a field that documents the
posting of the award in eMMA. This checklist is to be completed by the
date when the Notice to Proceed authorization is issued.
Page 15 of 17

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Corporate Purchasing Card
Finding 5
Supervisory reviews of corporate purchasing card (CPC) activity logs were not always
documented and did not use available Level-3 data to help ensure the propriety of the
purchases, as required.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MPBC comply with the Manual by
a. performing a documented independent supervisory review for the propriety of all CPC
purchases, and
b. ensuring supervisors use available Level-3 data as a part of the monthly review to aid in
the assessment of the propriety of purchases and payments.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Effective July 1, 2024, MPBC implemented a procedure to document
corrective action or independent review of all CPC purchases.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Effective July 1, 2024, MPBC uses the Level-3 data as part of the
corrective action or monthly review to aid in the assessment of proprietary purchases and
explain disagreement. payments.
Page 16 of 17

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 18, 2019 to June 30, 2023
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
MPBC had not segregated the duties of cash receipts and maintaining accounts receivable
records, as required.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MPBC properly segregate the duties of processing cash receipts and
maintaining accounts receivable records.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MPBC will comply with this recommendation to the extent that it is able
corrective action or to maintain adequate staff levels to facilitate the segregation of duties.
explain disagreement.
Page 17 of 17

--- Page 45 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Tari J. Covington
Staff Auditor