Title: Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Date: 10/30/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=672290081f2c66d064f92afb
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:11:31.626551
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
October 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 30, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Commission on
Civil Rights (MCCR) for the period beginning March 15, 2019 and ending June
16, 2023. MCCR is responsible for investigating and resolving cases of
discrimination in the areas of employment, housing, public accommodations,
State contracts, commercial leasing, and health services. MCCR also provides
education and outreach services to communicate current and accurate information
on issues affecting equal access and opportunity protected under State law.
Our audit disclosed that MCCR did not always assign employment and public
accommodation complaints to an investigator and issue written findings timely.
Our test of 20 cases open for more than one year noted that MCCR did not assign
13 cases to an investigator until 143 to 482 days after it authorized the complaint.
Additionally, MCCR did not issue a written finding for 12 tested cases within 300
days of being assigned to an investigator as required, including two cases where
the written finding was issued more than six years after assignment. Furthermore,
MCCR did not always document required supervisory review and approval of its
determinations not to investigate certain complaints.
In addition, we noted deficiencies in MCCR’s internal controls over
disbursements. Specifically, our test of 20 disbursements totaling $99,604
disclosed that 10 disbursements totaling $32,294 were not supported with
invoices, written agreements, or other documentation. MCCR also lacked
required critical controls over corporate purchasing cards resulting in the
improper use of certain cards after the cardholders left State service and
unsupported and questionable transactions, certain of which have been referred to
the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, MCCR hosted a “Biennial Civil Rights and Fair Housing Gala” (Gala) in
which it sold tickets and sponsorships, and incurred expenditures to pay the costs
of the event. Our review noted that MCCR did not establish adequate
accountability over funds received and expenses incurred for the Gala. MCCR’s
lack of proper accounting and control over Gala revenue and expenses is
significant because it ultimately reallocated federal funds totaling $30,000 to
cover Gala expenses that were intended to help investigate complaints.
MCCR’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. In accordance with our policy, we have edited MCCR’s response to
remove vendor names or products.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MCCR and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Special Investigations Unit Review and Referral 6
Termination of Management Employee 7
Concerns Regarding Timeliness of the Maryland Commission on Civil 7
Rights (MCCR) Case Investigations
Law Change – Attorney General’s Civil Rights Division 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Investigations of Potential Violations of Civil Rights Laws
Finding 1 – MCCR did not always assign employment and public 9
accommodation complaints to an investigator and issue related written
findings timely, and decisions to reject complaints were not always
subject to supervisory review and approval.
Disbursements
Finding 2 – MCCR could not provide documentation to support the 10
propriety of certain vendor disbursements.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 3 – MCCR lacked required critical controls over corporate 11
purchasing cards resulting in the improper use of certain cards after the
cardholders left State service and numerous unsupported transactions.
Biennial Civil Rights and Fair Housing Gala
Finding 4 – MCCR had not established adequate accountability and 14
control over Gala revenue and expenses resulting in the inability to
account for certain funds or justify certain expenditures. As a result,
federal funds intended for pursuing civil rights complaints were
reallocated to cover certain Gala expenses.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5 – MCCR had not established adequate accountability and 16
control over collections.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 18
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
In accordance with the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR) was established as
an independent unit of State government to further equal opportunities and to
promote better civil rights by seeking to eliminate discrimination throughout the
State. MCCR is responsible for investigating and resolving cases of
discrimination in the areas of employment, housing, public accommodations,
State contracts, commercial leasing, and health services. MCCR also provides
education and outreach services to communicate current and accurate information
on issues affecting equal access and opportunity protected under State law.
MCCR is governed by a 9-member Commission, appointed by the Governor to
staggered 6-year terms, subject to confirmation by the Maryland Senate.
According to MCCR’s records, during fiscal year 2023, MCCR initiated 661 civil
rights cases and closed 798 cases that were opened during, or prior to, fiscal year
2023. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2023, MCCR’s
expenditures totaled approximately $4.5 million, of which the majority
represented payroll costs (see Figure 1 on the following page). These
expenditures were primarily funded by approximately $3.2 million in general
funds and $1.2 million in federal funds (primarily for funding of expenditures
related to cases involving fair housing and employment discrimination).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
MCCR Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 32 97.0%
Vacant 1 3.0%
Total 33
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $3,699,146 82.1%
Technical and Special Fees 211,900 4.7%
Operating Expenses 592,982 13.2%
Total $4,504,028
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $3,214,567 71.4%
Special Fund 14,250 0.3%
Federal Fund 1,230,211 27.3%
Reimbursable Fund 45,000 1.0%
Total $4,504,028
Source: State financial and personnel records
Special Investigations Unit Review and Referral
During our fieldwork, we identified certain questionable corporate purchasing
card (CPC) activity, including CPC transactions on cards assigned to individuals
that were no longer employed at MCCR, which are further described in Finding 3.
As a result, our Special Investigation Unit conducted an expanded review of CPC
transactions. Based upon our review, certain of these matters were referred to the
Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. A referral to the Criminal
Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal
charges will be filed.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Termination of Management Employee
During our fieldwork, a management employee with responsibility for various
fiscal activities (such as, approval of invoice disbursements, issuance of CPCs,
approval of CPC purchases, and supervision of the cash receipt processes) was
terminated. MCCR’s documentation in the employee’s personnel file did not
provide a specific reason for the termination.
Concerns Regarding Timeliness of MCCR Case Investigations
The April 2021, 2022, and 2023 Joint Chairmen’s Reports required MCCR to
provide reports on investigator staffing and caseload information due to concerns
over the lack of timeliness to assign and complete cases. In its most recent report
dated September 15, 2023, MCCR stated that the most significant factor
impacting timeliness of case processing continues to be a lack of staff resources
and that it would need authorization to hire additional staff. Furthermore, MCCR
stated that it was pursuing options to address timeliness of case processing (such
as, streamlining processes, and training staff and requesting additional staff).
MCCR’s report stated that it had 264 unassigned employment cases, which
included 127 cases that were referred by the Federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission and 137 cases that originated within MCCR.
Additionally, MCCR stated that there were 594 open cases, which included 353
employment cases, 183 housing cases, 53 public accommodation cases, and 5
other types of cases. Finally, the report indicated there were 238 cases that were
open for over one year, which included 153 employment cases. See Finding 1
related to MCCR’s processing of case investigations.
Law Change – Attorney General’s Civil Rights Division
Effective October 1, 2023, Chapter 629, Laws of Maryland 2023 authorized the
Office of the Attorney General, (OAG) to investigate, prosecute, and remediate
certain civil rights violations. This law required the OAG to coordinate with the
MCCR in areas of overlapping jurisdiction. Therefore, in July 2023, MCCR and
the OAG entered into an agreement to formalize its cooperative relationship
concerning the investigation of civil rights complaints and to promote the sharing
of information (such as confidential or privileged materials and written work
products) to support the efficient and effective enforcement of Maryland and
Federal civil rights laws.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Investigations of Potential Violations of Civil Rights Laws
Background
The Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR) receives complaints of
potential violations of civil rights laws through its website, by phone, email, fax,
in person, or the mail. MCCR also receives cases to investigate from the Federal
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and the U.S Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in accordance with related federal
contracts for which MCCR is paid to investigate the cases. According to MCCR
records, during fiscal year 2023, it received 661 civil rights complaints, including
442 cases related to employment, 167 cases related to housing, 46 cases related to
public accommodation, and 6 cases related to State contracts.
MCCR intake personnel are responsible for determining if complaints should be
accepted or rejected. MCCR can reject a complaint if it determines it does not
have jurisdiction to investigate. According to MCCR’s policy, rejected
complaints are reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel. If the complaint
is accepted, State regulations require MCCR to authorize a complaint by
providing written notice to a complainant advising them of their rights and
responsibilities within 120 days of MCCR receiving the complaint. Once the
complaint is authorized, MCCR advised us that its goal is to immediately assign
the complaint to an investigator.
MCCR investigators perform procedures, such as interviews with the complainant
and witnesses, and analyzing applicable documents to determine the facts of the
case. After completion of the investigation, the investigator prepares a written
report with the positions of the complainant and respondent, and the results of the
investigation. MCCR’s internal guidelines require the issuance of a written
finding for cases within 300 days after the case is assigned to an investigator. If
the written finding discloses civil rights violations occurred, the case is referred to
MCCR’s legal counsel where it can be resolved through mediation, settlement, or
other legal action (such as, lawsuits).
We reviewed MCCR procedures for investigations of employment and public
accommodation complaints.1 According to MCCR’s records, as of August 7,
1 Although housing complaints were significant, we did not review procedures for investigations
of these complaints since MCCR handled them in accordance with agreements established by
HUD. Therefore, we focused our review on employment and public accommodation complaints
since they were handled in accordance with MCCR’s internal guidelines.
8

--- Page 11 ---
2023, there were 425 open employment and public accommodation cases,
including 157 cases (37 percent) that had been open for over one year from the
date the complaint was assigned to an investigator.
Finding 1
MCCR did not always assign employment and public accommodation
complaints to an investigator and issue related written findings timely, and
decisions to reject complaints were not always subject to supervisory review
and approval.
Analysis
MCCR did not always assign employment and public accommodation complaints
to an investigator and issue related written findings timely, and decisions to reject
complaints were not always subject to supervisory review and approval.
Specifically, our test of 20 cases (19 employment and 1 public accommodation)
that MCCR records indicated were open for more than one year as of August 7,
2023 disclosed the following:
 MCCR did not assign 13 cases to an investigator in a timely manner.
Specifically, the cases were assigned between 143 days to 482 days after
MCCR had authorized the complaint. As noted in its response to the most
recent Joint Chairmen’s Report that addressed this issue, MCCR stated that
the delays in assigning cases was due to staffing shortages. This condition
may also have been caused, at least in part, because MCCR written procedures
did not include a specific timeline to assign cases to an investigator. Rather,
MCCR advised its unwritten goal was to immediately assign the complaint to
an investigator once a complaint is authorized.
 MCCR did not issue a written finding within 300 days of the case being
assigned to an investigator for 12 cases as required by its internal guidelines
(including 7 that were also not assigned to an investigator timely).
Specifically, as of August 2023, MCCR had not issued a written finding for
10 cases outstanding between 333 days and more than 4 years since being
assigned to an investigator and for the remaining 2 cases, the written finding
was issued more than 6 years after being assigned to an investigator.
Additionally, MCCR did not always document required supervisory review and
approval of determinations to reject complaints for investigation. According to
MCCR records 192 complaints were rejected during the period January 2023
through May 2023. Our test of 10 rejected complaints disclosed that 8 complaints
did not have documentation of the required supervisory review and approval.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCCR
a. ensure that employment and public accommodation cases are assigned to
an investigator upon authorization and establish written criteria for
timely assignment,
b. issue written findings for cases within 300 days from assignment, and
c. document supervisory review and approval for rejected complaints.
Disbursements
Finding 2
MCCR could not provide documentation to support the propriety of certain
vendor disbursements.
Analysis
MCCR could not provide documentation to support the propriety of certain
vendor disbursements. Our test of 20 disbursements totaling $99,604,2 made
during the period June 2019 through June 2023, disclosed that MCCR could not
provide invoices, written agreements, or other documentation to support the
propriety for 10 disbursements totaling $32,294. Although we were subsequently
able to obtain invoices from the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting
Division, without the supporting documentation we could not readily determine
the propriety of the related payments.
According to State records, MCCR processed vendor disbursements through the
State’s financial management information system totaling $500,575 during our
audit period. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires agencies to ensure that invoices agree with supporting documentation
prior to payment.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCCR ensure that disbursements are properly
supported and appropriate, including those noted above.
2 Our selection of test items was based on the significance of vendor payments during the period
June 2019 through June 2023.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Corporate Purchasing Cards (CPC)
According to MCCR records, during our audit period there were four CPC
cardholders with related purchases totaling $635,755. Our initial review of CPC
activity identified certain concerns including missing or questionable supporting
documentation. In response to these concerns, our Special Investigation Unit
(SIU) conducted an expanded review of CPC transactions and procedures.
Specifically, we selected 60 CPC transactions for testing based on risk (such as,
purchases made on cards after the cardholder separated employment from MCCR,
purchases without Level-3 data, and Level-3 purchase descriptions that appeared
questionable). In addition, we reviewed cardholder logs and credit card
statements related to these purchases.
Based on our review and the conditions noted below, we referred certain of these
matters to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. A referral to
the Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or
that criminal charges will be filed.
Finding 3
MCCR lacked required critical controls over CPCs resulting in the improper
use of certain cards after the cardholders left State service and numerous
unsupported transactions.
Analysis
MCCR lacked required internal controls over CPCs resulting in the improper use
of certain cards after the cardholders left State service and numerous unsupported
transactions.
 CPC transactions were not always supported for the 4 cardholders.
Specifically, our test of 60 CPC transactions totaling $53,7683 disclosed that
31 transactions totaling $22,464 did not have supporting documents, such as
receipts, or invoices for the transactions. Without proper supporting
documentation we were unable to determine if these transactions were for
legitimate purchases. In response to our inquiries MCCR management could
not provide any explanation for the purchases to help determine if they were
proper.
 Monthly CPC cardholder logs and credit card statements were not always
available, completed, signed by the cardholder, or reviewed and signed by the
3 Our test selection of CPC purchases was based on risk (such as purchases without Level-3 data,
and Level-3 purchase descriptions that appeared questionable).
11

--- Page 14 ---
supervisor as required. Specifically, our review of 34 monthly cardholder
logs associated with the aforementioned 60 CPC transactions during the
period April 2019 through August 2023, disclosed that MCCR could not
provide 13 monthly logs, and 6 monthly logs were not signed by a supervisor
to document their review of the underlying transactions.
Furthermore, when logs and related statements were available, the amounts
recorded on the logs did not always agree to the related bank credit card
statements. For example, a cardholder recorded purchases totaling $12,184 on
a monthly log when the corresponding bank credit card statement indicated
charges totaling $13,981, a difference of $1,796. Our review of the credit
card statement also noted several transactions that were not included on the
log, such as a payment to a caterer totaling $440. In response to our inquiries,
MCCR management could not provide any explanation for the missing or
unapproved monthly logs and amounts recorded on the log that did not agree
to the related bank credit card statements.
 MCCR did not use available Level-3 purchasing data from the issuing bank to
help determine the propriety of CPC transactions. This data, when reported
by merchants, provides detailed purchasing information, including invoice-
level line-item details (such as item descriptions and item quantities). We
determined that Level-3 data was available for CPC transactions totaling
$351,818 during our audit period.
 MCCR did not always promptly cancel CPCs when the cardholders stopped
working at MCCR. Our review disclosed that two cards for individuals who
separated from MCCR employment in August 2022 and December 2022
remained active for approximately six months beyond the separation dates.
Based on our review of transactional data obtained from the contractor
administering the State’s CPC program, we noted that collectively these cards
were used to process 308 transactions totaling $41,421 after the employees’
separation.
MCCR management advised that some of these transactions were recurring
charges (such as monthly subscriptions for postage), and some were made by
other MCCR employees, including the supervisor responsible for approving
cardholder transactions. Our limited review disclosed questionable purchases
totaling $5,508 made by other employees for items such as food, flowers,
airline tickets, information technology services, and miscellaneous online
items. Monthly cardholder logs and bank statements for purchases made on
these cards were typically not available and therefore, we could not determine
12

--- Page 15 ---
if these purchases were proper and subject to independent review and
approval.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual requires the cardholder complete and sign a log of all CPC
purchases and attach the related detailed support. Supervisory signature is
required on the logs and related statements to certify that the CPC requirements
have been followed, such as documentation existed for each purchase, and
purchases were related to the nature and purpose of the agency. The Manual
further requires State agencies to verify Level-3 data to transaction logs and
document monthly reviews of Level-3 data to transaction logs as part of
transaction monitoring. Finally, the Manual requires accounts of terminated
employees be closed upon termination of employment.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCCR comply with the Manual. Specifically, MCCR
should
a. ensure CPC cardholders prepare complete and accurate CPC logs and
include documentation to support the related transactions;
b. ensure cardholders and supervisors sign the CPC logs and related bank
statements to indicate purchases are appropriate, and purchase amounts
agree to the bank credit card statements;
c. incorporate the use of Level-3 data, when available, as a part of the
monthly supervisory review to aid in the assessment of the propriety of
CPC purchases;
d. promptly cancel cards assigned to individuals no longer employed by
MCCR; and
e. obtain support for the aforementioned questionable transactions with no
documentation and take appropriate action such as recovering the cost of
any improper purchases.
Biennial Civil Rights and Fair Housing Gala
Background
MCCR hosted a “Biennial Civil Rights and Fair Housing Gala” (Gala) on August
20, 2022.4 The Gala took place at a hotel ballroom and included dinner, alcoholic
beverages, presentations by speakers, and various activities. According to
minutes of MCCR’s Commission meetings, over 340 individuals attended the
4 MCCR recently hosted another Gala in August 2024 which was subsequent to our audit
fieldwork and was not subject to our review.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Gala. MCCR sold admission tickets for $75 or $125 (general admission or
premium admission) and solicited sponsorships ranging from $500 to $20,000.
Gala tickets and sponsorships could be purchased online through MCCR’s
website or via check and were to be deposited in one of two designated bank
accounts.
Finding 4
MCCR had not established adequate accountability and control over Gala
revenue and expenses resulting in the inability to account for certain funds or
justify certain expenditures. As a result, federal funds intended for pursuing
civil rights complaints were reallocated to cover certain Gala expenses.
Analysis
MCCR had not established adequate accountability and control over funds
received and expenses incurred for the Gala.
 MCCR did not have any documentation to support the disposition of
sponsorship revenue, certain of which could not be accounted for. According
to MCCR records, $32,000 should have been received from nine sponsors.
Our review of State accounting records disclosed that MCCR only recorded
deposits of $19,000 for six sponsors. MCCR could not document the
disposition of the remaining $13,000 from the three other sponsors.
 MCCR was unable to provide documentation, such as detailed sales reports
for online transactions, to support the number of tickets purchased and related
payments received. According to State accounting records, MCCR collected
$16,376 through two commercial banks for the sale of Gala tickets. We
attempted to determine whether all revenue was received and deposited but
were unable to do so based upon the available information.
 MCCR did not maintain adequate records for bank accounts used to collect
Gala ticket revenue. Specifically, MCCR did not have executed written
agreements with two banks for accounts used for ticket revenue and did not
retain bank statements for one of the bank accounts to support the disposition
of the funds. Furthermore, MCCR could not document that these accounts
were approved by the State Treasurer’s Office (STO) as required. We
subsequently confirmed with STO that it had approved these accounts.
In addition, our review of the State’s financial management system revenue
reports identified deposits totaling $2,175 to a third bank account during the
period April 2022 through August 2022. MCCR management could not
document the disposition of amounts deposited into the account or provide
14

--- Page 17 ---
documentation such as the bank name, STO approval of the account, or bank
statements. Based on our inquiries, MCCR contacted the STO which
confirmed that the account was an e-commerce account previously used for
the Gala and that related receipts were deposited to the State. The account
was serviced by a vendor that was not procured or approved by STO for
banking services and the account has subsequently been closed.
 MCCR did not maintain documentation to support Gala expenditures and
could not readily determine the total cost of the Gala. Based on our review of
State disbursement and CPC records, we identified approximately $90,000 in
payments for goods and services that appeared to be related to the Gala. Our
test of six of these payments totaling $60,010 (some of which were included
in our testing noted in Findings 2 and 3) disclosed that three payments totaling
$14,200 did not have documentation to support the propriety of the amounts
paid. For example, the invoice supporting a $5,000 payment stated it was for
a Gala event consultant. MCCR could not provide documentation such as a
written agreement with the consultant or support for the work that was
completed.
MCCR’s lack of accounting for Gala revenue and expenses is significant because
it ultimately reallocated federal funds intended to help investigate complaints to
cover Gala expenses. Specifically, on September 26, 2022, MCCR requested the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Office of Fair Housing
and Equal Opportunity (FHEO) to reallocate $30,000 of administrative funds to
help offset the Gala costs. According to FHEO’s written approval, the funds were
originally intended to cover the cost of hiring a contractual employee to assist in
the review of housing complaints for litigation and probable cause review. On
May 2, 2023, FHEO approved MCCR’s request to reallocate the funds. The
reallocation of these funds is significant because as noted on page 7, MCCR
advised the legislature that staffing shortages are the most significant factor
impacting timeliness of case processing.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCCR
a. develop comprehensive procedures for future events to ensure all revenue
and expenditures are properly accounted for and related documentation
is retained;
b. investigate and account for all revenue collected for the Gala, including
the aforementioned unaccounted for sponsor payments and ticket sales;
and
c. ensure future bank accounts are approved by the STO, bank agreements
are properly executed, and related activity is monitored.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
MCCR had not established adequate accountability and control over
collections.
Analysis
MCCR had not established adequate accountability and control over collections.
MCCR receives checks for settlements of certain civil rights cases to be
forwarded to claimants and checks in the mail for fees related to information
requests, civil penalties, and other miscellaneous payments, including those
related to the Gala noted in Finding 4.
 Our review disclosed that the employee who received settlement checks did
not record them upon receipt to establish accountability over the funds. The
employee forwarded the settlement checks to another employee who delivered
them to the related claimants. MCCR could not readily quantify the number
or value of settlement checks received and delivered but advised us that the
settlement checks are included in monetary relief category, which totaled $1.1
million according to its fiscal year 2023 annual report.
 MCCR did not record or endorse checks received in the mail immediately
upon receipt, did not secure the checks prior to deposit, and did not perform a
documented independent verification to ensure the checks were deposited. In
addition, beginning in March 2023, MCCR allowed an employee to take
collections home to make the deposits on the way to work the next business
day. MCCR recorded check deposits totaling approximately $14,900 in the
State’s accounting records during fiscal year 2023. Due to the lack of
documentation, we were unable to reasonably ensure the accuracy and
completeness of the deposits.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including initial
accountability over collections received, timely deposits, and proper verification
of collections to deposit.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCCR
a. record all collections, including settlement checks, upon receipt and
ensure the proper disposition of the funds;
b. restrictively endorse checks prior to deposit;
16

--- Page 19 ---
c. properly safeguard checks prior to deposit including discontinuing the
practice of allowing employees to take collections home prior to deposit;
and
d. ensure that an independent and documented verification of checks
received to amounts deposited is performed.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Commission on
Civil Rights (MCCR) for the period beginning March 15, 2019 and ending, June
16, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCCR’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included investigations of potential violations of civil
rights, procurements, disbursements, corporate purchasing cards (CPC), payroll,
and cash receipts. In addition, we identified certain questionable CPC activity
and our Special Investigation Unit conducted an expanded review of CPC
transactions.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 15, 2019 to June 16, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MCCR’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
18

--- Page 21 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from automated systems used by MCCR for maintaining
civil rights investigation data for the purpose of planning and testing. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MCCR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MCCR, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCCR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
19

--- Page 22 ---
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
MCCR’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MCCR regarding the
results of our review of its response.
20

--- Page 23 ---
APPENDIX
State of Maryland
Commission on Civil Rights
Respect....Integrity...Effective Communication
October 18, 2024
Governor
Wes Moore
Lt. Governor
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Aruna Miller
Legislative Auditor
Commission Chair Department of Legislative Services
Stephanie Suerth, MPA, Office of Legislative Audits
CCEP
351 West Camden Street – Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Commission Vice Chair
Janssen E. Evelyn, Esq.
Commissioners
Eileen M. Levitt, SPHR,
Dear Mr. Tanen,
SHRM-SCP
Angela Scott, Esq.
On behalf of The Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR), I am submitting the
Magdalena S. Navarro,
Commission's responses to the audit findings outlined in your recent letter. We appreciate
MSc
Jeff Rosen the opportunity to address the issues raised and remain committed to ensuring that all
Gina McKnight-Smith, aspects of our operations comply with the highest standards of transparency,
PharmD, MBA
accountability, and efficiency.
Noah Thomas Metheny,
Esq., MPH
Our responses are enclosed for your review and further consideration. Should you have
any questions or require additional documentation, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Officers
Executive Director MCCR is dedicated to resolving these matters and enhancing our processes in line with
Cleveland L. Horton II your recommendations.
General Counsel Thank you for your continued support and collaboration.
Glendora C. Hughes,
Esq.
Assistant Director Sincerely,
Nicolette Young
Education and Cleveland L. Horton II
Outreach Director
Candice Gray
Cleveland L. Horton II
Executive Director
.
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
“Our vision is to have a State that is free from any trace of unlawful discrimination.”
William Donald Schaefer Tower, 6 Saint Paul Street, Suite 900, Baltimore, Maryland 21202-1631
Phone: 410-767-8600 ∙ Toll Free: 1-800-637-6247 ∙ Maryland Relay: 711 ∙ Fax: 410-333-1841
Website: mccr.maryland.gov ∙ E-Mail: mccr@maryland.gov

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
Investigations of Potential Violations of Civil Rights Laws
Finding 1
MCCR did not always assign employment and public accommodation
complaints to an investigator and issue related written findings timely, and
decisions to reject complaints were not always subject to supervisory review
and approval.
We recommend that MCCR
a. ensure that employment and public accommodation cases are assigned to
an investigator upon authorization and establish written criteria for
timely assignment,
b. issue written findings for cases within 300 days from assignment, and
c. document supervisory review and approval for rejected complaints.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide It is key to note that delays in assigning cases or issuing written
additional comments as determinations are directly related to staffing shortages and not as a result
deemed necessary. of any specific process of MCCR. Historically, Intake staff have not been
required to obtain supervisory approval to abort/reject inquiries that are
outside of our jurisdiction (i.e. food stamp program, parole/probation,
unemployment decision appeals, etc.). MCCR receives a high number of
aborts that do not fall within our jurisdiction and in an effort to not backlog
the supervisory queue with those inquiries that are clearly outside of our
purview, Intake staff have been given the autonomy to process those
aborts without the requirement of having supervisory approval to do so.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of MCCR’s internal guideline is, and will continue to be, to assign cases
corrective action or immediately upon authorization and service of a complaint of
explain disagreement. discrimination. At times, the assignment of cases is delayed due to staffing
shortages as described in the audit report. MCCR is continuously looking
at our processes to determine how we can be more efficient and streamline
our processes. MCCR is also working with the administration to analyze
our current staffing levels and determine the appropriate and available
options to address our identified staffing shortages.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of Our internal guidelines, issued to all staff, highlight the criteria for written
corrective action or findings to be issued within 300 days of assignment to an Investigator.
explain disagreement. Complex cases tend to take longer than 300 days to investigate to ensure
that the appropriate information has been gathered to make an accurate
and justified determination. These cases typically require extensive
witness interviews, document requests and onsite visits. In addition, the
cases that we have in our inventory that are trending toward Probable
Cause also require an additional review process which adds to our time in
process and delays the issuance of the written finding. MCCR has
requested additional staff, which would significantly improve our time in
process and drastically reduce the amount of time it takes us to issue our
written determinations.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of All Intake staff have been trained in ensuring that all aborts/rejections of
corrective action or inquiries that are submitted to MCCR for review are reviewed and
explain disagreement. approved by supervisory staff prior to the final disposition of all inquiries.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
Disbursements
Finding 2
MCCR could not provide documentation to support the propriety of certain
vendor disbursements.
We recommend that MCCR ensure that disbursements are properly
supported and appropriate, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MCCR has no concerns with this information.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/2024
Please provide details of MCCR will require that all vendor disbursements include proper
corrective action or invoicing, have a detailed statement of charges or contract, and an updated
explain disagreement. W-9 for the vendor profile. Documentation for all vendor payments will
be retained by the office for a minimum of 5 years and filed appropriately
based on fiscal year.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
Corporate Purchasing Cards (CPC)
Finding 3
MCCR lacked required critical controls over CPCs resulting in the improper
use of certain cards after the cardholders left State service and numerous
unsupported transactions.
We recommend that MCCR comply with the Manual. Specifically, MCCR
should
a. ensure CPC cardholders prepare complete and accurate CPC logs and
include documentation to support the related transactions;
b. ensure cardholders and supervisors sign the CPC logs and related bank
statements to indicate purchases are appropriate, and purchase amounts
agree to the bank credit card statements;
c. incorporate the use of Level-3 data, when available, as a part of the
monthly supervisory review to aid in the assessment of the propriety of
CPC purchases;
d. promptly cancel cards assigned to individuals no longer employed by
MCCR; and
e. obtain support for the aforementioned questionable transactions with no
documentation and take appropriate action such as recovering the cost of
any improper purchases.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MCCR has no concerns with this information
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/2024
Please provide details of MCCR will work with the CPC cardholders to ensure that all charges
corrective action or made to the cards are appropriately documented. Corrective measures
explain disagreement. will include CPC cardholders completing monthly CPC logs that will be
signed by the cardholder, Assistant Director (Fiscal Officer) and the
Executive Director (or designee). Documentation included in the package
will include receipts for all transactions and requests for purchase (emails)
for all transactions that aren’t recurring monthly charges.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The Assistant Director and CPC cardholders will sign and date the CPC
corrective action or logs and bank statements each month as part of the CPC reconciliation
explain disagreement. process. Additionally, the transactions will be appropriately documented,
and a review of charges will be done monthly. All charges will be
reviewed against what is on the statement, internal records, and FMIS
reporting for CPC monthly charges.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of The Assistant Director will run the Level 3 report each month to aid in the
corrective action or assessment of the propriety of CPC purchases. Prior to leaving in April
explain disagreement. 2022, the prior Assistant Director, did a review of Level 3 reports each
month from May 2019 – February 2022. It is unknown if Level 3 reports
were reviewed from March 2022 – February 2023. MCCR has ensured
that Level 3 reports are completed from March 2024 onward. OLA
advised MCCR that in order to confirm the review of Level 3 data, MCCR
should document the review by either adding a column indicating the
review status of each item or printing the report and initialing it. The
reviewer will incorporate this guidance on all future Level 3 monthly
report reviews.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of The designated PCPA, Assistant Director, will ensure that once a CPC
corrective action or cardholder leaves MCCR the card is destroyed, and the Comptroller’s
explain disagreement. General Accounting Division (GAD) CPC unit is notified to deactivate
the card. All recurring charges will be moved to another card and no
additional charges will be made to the card prior to deactivation by GAD
CPC.
Recommendation 3e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/2024
Please provide details of MCCR has received a list of questionable charges for review. If charges
corrective action or are deemed questionable, MCCR will research to find the receipts, work
explain disagreement. with GAD to recover the funds to include returning the items or attempt
to get credit from the vendor.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
Biennial Civil Rights and Fair Housing Gala
Finding 4
MCCR had not established adequate accountability and control over Gala
revenue and expenses resulting in the inability to account for certain funds or
justify certain expenditures. As a result, federal funds intended for pursuing
civil rights complaints were reallocated to cover certain Gala expenses.
We recommend that MCCR
a. develop comprehensive procedures for future events to ensure all revenue
and expenditures are properly accounted for and related documentation
is retained;
b. investigate and account for all revenue collected for the Gala, including
the aforementioned unaccounted for sponsor payments and ticket sales;
and
c. ensure future bank accounts are approved by the STO, bank agreements
are properly executed, and related activity is monitored.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Reconciliation of revenue (ticket sales, sponsorships) and expenditures
additional comments as that were implemented during the April 2018 gala will be reinstated to
deemed necessary. ensure the appropriate documentation of all activities related to the gala
or other future MCCR sponsored events.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of Corrective actions include running monthly revenue reports from the
corrective action or payment portal used to sell tickets for MCCR events. The reports will
explain disagreement. include the payee(s) contact information, ticket amount, and date of
purchase. The reports will be reconciled against the R*Stars ACH Entries
revenue reports received from STO when revenue is received in the
agency’s depository account. This report will be reconciled against what
is reported in FMIS to ensure the accuracy of accounting between the
payment portal and the State. Additionally, all sponsorship checks will
be logged on to a spreadsheet and deposited in MCCR’s account for
accurate accounting in FMIS. All event-related expenditures will be
processed using funds raised for that event only and won’t be
inappropriately commingled with funds for unrelated MCCR activities.
Program cost accounts have been created to ensure proper documentation
for individual events.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
MCCR will continue to work through STO to ensure that all revenue is
credited appropriately, and they approve the Pricing Offer Letter with the
bank to create or update the payment portal so MCCR can sell tickets for
events.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/2024
Please provide details of Gala tickets are purchased through the payment portal. The account was
corrective action or initially set up in 2022 with assistance from STO staff and the bank who
explain disagreement. serves as the State’s merchant services vendor. All tickets purchased
through the portal go directly into MCCR’s depository account and the
transactions are reconciled through STO, reported to GAD and updated in
FMIS. MCCR fiscal staff were able to run transaction reports for the
timeframe April 2022 - August 2022. Ticket sales during this period
totaled $14,600. MCCR will do an internal review of sponsorship
payments to the agency. MCCR has a list of sponsors, and we will reach
out to them to get a copy of the sponsorship checks for our records. If
there is discrepancy between what was reported in FMIS, we will work
with the GAD to resolve any outstanding revenue accounting issues for
FY 2022 – 2023.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/2024
Please provide details of MCCR is in the process of providing explanations for the accounts during
corrective action or this audit period that will clear up the identified issue. MCCR confirmed
explain disagreement. from STO that the account is related to incoming merchant services
transactions to the agency’s depository account. The transactions
identified in the merchant services account are directly related to the 2022
Civil Rights Gala ticket sales. MCCR fiscal staff were able to locate
correspondence from January and February 2022 when we started using
the selected merchants to set up the registration payment portal for the
2022 Civil Rights Gala. STO and the identified bank advised there would
be a transaction fee for users who register for our gala using certain
merchant services accounts. Due to the fee, select transactions are
identified separately from other credit card transaction types. MCCR
received the funds from April 2022 - August 2022 and staff were able to
reconcile the ten transactions using the R*Stars document numbers
provided by OLA. MCCR staff did not create the account. The account
was created by the bank with STO knowledge. Funds from the transaction
fees were deposited into MCCR’s depository account and reconciled into
FMIS. The account is still open, and the agency receives monthly
statements. MCCR will inquire with the bank to see if transactions can be
retrieved from the April 2022 – August 2022 timeframe to confirm the
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
total funds collected and if all funds were transferred to the State’s
account.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
MCCR had not established adequate accountability and control over
collections.
We recommend that MCCR
a. record all collections, including settlement checks, upon receipt and
ensure the proper disposition of the funds;
b. restrictively endorse checks prior to deposit;
c. properly safeguard checks prior to deposit including discontinuing the
practice of allowing employees to take collections home prior to deposit;
and
d. ensure that an independent and documented verification of checks
received to amounts deposited is performed.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MCCR has no concerns with this information.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of All checks will be logged onto a spreadsheet for documentation and unit
corrective action or staff will make copies of all checks received prior to deposit or distribution
explain disagreement. to the appropriate party for adequate agency record keeping. For checks
specifically for MCCR (i.e. MPIA checks, sponsorship checks), after
depositing the check in the agency’s account, all deposits will be logged
into FMIS using the correct transaction code and program cost account for
the entry. Files will be kept in a secure, locked location that is only
accessible by the Administrative and Support Services staff.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of MCCR will ensure that staff appropriately endorse checks prior to
corrective action or depositing. Internal controls to include check processing procedures will
explain disagreement. be implemented and MCCR staff will be trained on the procedures to
include recording, depositing, and logging the deposits in R*Stars.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of MCCR will ensure that checks are securely locked away until deposited
corrective action or into the agency’s depository account. For MCCR specific checks, MCCR
explain disagreement. staff will be required to deposit all checks into the bank account within
one business day of receipt. Effective 09/06/2024, MCCR has
discontinued the practice of receiving checks directly from parties to
complaints of discrimination. The checks will be issued directly to the
appropriate party, and MCCR will receive written confirmation that the
checks were mailed and received by the appropriate party, along with a
copy of the check, to be included in the associated case file.
Recommendation 5d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/06/2024
Please provide details of Internal controls for check deposit procedures will require the Assistant
corrective action or Director to review the check log monthly to ensure it reconciles back to
explain disagreement. what is reported in R*Stars. Additionally, staff will be required to keep
copies of the DAFR 8901 Interface Control Report that documents
transactions in R*Stars.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 33 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Matusala Y. Abishe
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Senior Auditors
Johanna K. Bachman
Staff Auditor