Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg State University


Related Report Dated [(9/11/2024) USMO]

Related Report Dated [(9/11/2024) Frostburg]

Video Presentation (University System of Maryland and Frostburg State University starts at 43:05)
Date: 11/13/2024
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67377afba71b533a8cece8f7
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:11:50.339974
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University System of Maryland Office (USMO)
and
Frostburg State University (FSU)
Reports Dated September 11, 2024
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Adam J. Westover, CPA
November 13, 2024

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview for USMO and FSU
 USMO develops system-wide policies and procedures; monitors
academic, financial, and administrative performance; provides
system-wide financing through the issuance of bonds; and provides
management information to USM’s 12 institutions and 3 regional
higher education centers. The USMO audit report covers the period
from August 20, 2018 to September 30, 2022 and contains 6
findings, including 1 non-cybersecurity-related repeat finding.
 FSU is a comprehensive public institution offering an array of
undergraduate and graduate degrees. The FSU audit report covers
the period from August 26, 2019 to July 15, 2023 and contains 7
findings, including 1 repeat finding.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 2
State University

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key USMO and FSU Findings
Contracts Procured by Other Entities
 USMO Finding 1 – USMO had not established sufficient procedures for
USM institutions to follow when using contracts procured by other
entities.
 FSU Finding 3 - FSU did not verify that its use of contracts procured by
other entities was in the best interest of FSU as required by the BOR.
Student Financial Aid
 USMO Finding 2 – USMO did not have a policy to require institutions to
consider tuition remission when awarding student financial aid.
Contracts and Disbursements
 FSU Findings 1 and 2 – FSU did not comply with certain procurement
policies when it procured an IT system and lost $680,000 on it and did
not competitively procure student mental health services.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 3
State University

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contracts Procured by Other Entities (USMO Finding 1 - Policy Issue)
USMO had not established sufficient procedures for its institutions to
follow when using contracts procured by other entities.
 USMO does not require its institutions to document that they comply
with BOR policy which require institutions to ensure contracts
procured by other entities are in the best interest of the institutions.
 In June 2024 (subsequent to our audit) the BOR approved removing
this requirement and we question the removal of that requirement.
 We believe including the requirement in BOR policy made it clear to
institutions that the method was not to be used just for convenience
or expediency. Furthermore, institutions would be required to explain
why this method best served the institution over other available
procurement methods.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 4
State University

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contracts Procured by Other Entities (FSU Finding 3 ) (Repeat)
FSU did not verify that its use of contracts procured by other entities
was in the best interest of FSU as required by BOR procurement
policies and procedures which were in effect during the audit period.
FSU also did not verify that rates charged were consistent with the
related contracts.
 FSU did not ensure that the use of these contracts in lieu of
competitively procuring them was in the best interest of FSU. In
addition, FSU did not ensure the original contracts had been
awarded using an appropriate procurement process.
 FSU did not verify that the specific contract rates it was charged were
consistent with the original contract for three contracts totaling $6.9
million.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 5
State University

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Student Financial Aid (USMO Finding 2 – Policy Issue)
USMO did not have a policy to require institutions to consider tuition
remission when awarding financial aid.
 BOR policies requires institutions to develop policy guidelines for
the award of aid including criteria based on need and/or merit;
however, it did not require institutions to consider tuition
remission.
 Our November 1, 2023 audit report on Coppin State University
noted certain individuals appeared to have taken advantage of the
USM tuition remission policy and certain COVID relief aid.
 We noted one USM institution had a financial aid policy that
considered tuition remission and other tuition waivers when
awarding aid. A similar system-wide policy would help to ensure
consistency between institutions.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 6
State University

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contracts and Disbursements (FSU Finding 1)
FSU did not exercise adequate due diligence or comply with certain
procurement policies when it procured a new financial aid system,
which FSU discontinued after expending $680,000.
 FSU did not prepare a written sole source justification for the
system software and related licensing as required by BOR policy.
 FSU did not conduct a formal analysis to determine if the system
would meet the needs of FSU.
 FSU selected the implementation vendor without preparing and
submitting a detailed task order request for proposal to 16 other
potential vendors available under the Maryland Enterprise
Education Consortium (MEEC) contract used to select the vendor.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 7
State University

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contracts and Disbursements (FSU Finding 2)
FSU continued to use the same vendor for student mental health
services which was initially obtained without competition and without
obtaining Board of Public Works (BPW) approval.
 FSU extended the contract multiple times, claiming that the
vendor is the sole source for these services. Our review disclosed
that the written justification for the initial emergency contract and
subsequent sole source justifications were not signed until we
requested them in August 2023.
 FSU did not obtain BPW approval when total contract costs
exceeded $1 million as required by USM policy.
 We reviewed five vendor invoices totaling approximately
$262,000 and found overpayments of approximately $9,600.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 8
State University

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other USMO and FSU Findings
USMO Finding 3 – USMO did not maintain a current and comprehensive
listing of all Centers and Institutes established by its institutions and did not
ensure that the establishment of those Centers and Institutes had been
adequately justified, as required. (Repeat Finding)
USMO Finding 4 - USMO did not adequately safeguard cash receipts prior to
deposit and did not have sufficient procedures to ensure all collections
were subsequently deposited.
USMO Findings 5 & 6 – Confidential Cybersecurity Findings
FSU Finding 4 – FSU had not established sufficient controls over student
residency determinations and certain adjustments recorded in student
accounts.
FSU Finding 5 - FSU did not ensure that all institutional aid awards, which
were based in part on the student’s residency status, reflected the
student’s actual residency status at the time of award. We identified
incorrect awards totaling approximately $64,000.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 9
State University

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
Our audits of USMO and FSU identified numerous weaknesses in contracts
procured by other entities, student financial aid, and contracts and
disbursements. We made detailed recommendations to USMO and FSU
and we will assess the status of the recommendations during the course of
our next audit.
We are happy to answer any questions.
University System of Maryland Office and Frostburg Page 10
State University