Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - University of Maryland Global Campus


Related Report Dated (8/20/2024)

Video Presentation (University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Global Campus starts at 12:00)
Date: 11/13/2024
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67377afba71b533a8cece8f6
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:11:41.209317
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University System of Maryland (USM) University of Maryland Global
Campus (UMGC)
Report Dated August 20, 2024
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Adam J. Westover, CPA
November 13, 2024

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 UMGC is a public institution of USM and operates under the
jurisdiction of the USM’s Board of Regents (BOR). UMGC offers
degree and non-credit educational programs to students who prefer
not to enroll in more traditional programs. The majority of UMGC’s
courses are taught online.
 UMGC has created three business entities designated as High
Impact Economic Development Activities (HIEDA). The three entities
are UMGC Ventures (Ventures), AccelerEd, and HelioCampus.
(Additional details on slides 5-9)
 The audit report covers the period from October 1, 2018 to
December 31, 2022. The report contains 7 findings. UMGC
addressed the four findings from our prior audit report dated
November 2019.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
UMGC Business Initiatives
 Finding 1 – Certain activities raise questions whether UMGC’s
relationship with Ventures is in the best interest of UMGC and the
State.
 Finding 2 – UMGC obtained $184.1 million of information technology
(IT) services from Ventures without competitive procurement and
without verifying the amounts paid were proper.
 Finding 3 – UMGC did not adequately monitor an IT project, which was
ultimately determined to be unusable and abandoned after UMGC had
paid $25.7 million to Ventures.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings (continued)
Advertising Contracts
 Finding 4 – UMGC did not have formal documented procedures for
assigning work to pre-qualified vendors for two master advertising
contracts totaling $500 million, and related statements of work were
not sufficiently detailed to allow for effective monitoring by UMGC.
 Finding 5 – UMGC did not adequately justify two sole source
procurements of advertising services and did not consolidate the
procurements which we believe circumvented USM Procurement
Policies and Procedures.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
UMGC Business Initiatives and Limitation of OLA Work
Background
 HIEDA entities may be established by institutions of higher
education to promote economic interests of the State in areas
such as job creation, commercialization, and entrepreneurship.
 In September 2015, the BOR approved the creation of
HelioCampus, which was a spin-off of UMGC’s Office of Analytics.
A controlling interest was sold by UMGC in December 2019.
 In June 2016, the BOR approved the creation of Ventures, a tax-
exempt holding company for business commercialized by UMGC.
 In June 2017, the BOR approved UMGC’s spin-off of its Office of
Technology as a subsidiary company within Ventures. The
company, AccelerEd, was designated as a HIEDA in June 2019,
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
UMGC Business Initiatives and Limitation of OLA Work (continued)
Background
 The purpose of Ventures included the commercialization of the
technology, business process, and intellectual property of UMGC,
 We attempted to review certain activity relating to all three
HIEDA’s, as well as oversight by UMGC, but UMGC stated that it
was unable to provide the information because of IRS regulations.
 According to UMGC’s understanding of IRS regulations, UMGC is
required to remain at arm’s length from Ventures and not subject
to direct control from UMGC. Consequently, this limited our ability
to review the relationship between the entities.
 We question UMGC’s position of independence from Venture for
among other reasons, UMGC’s president appoints the majority of
the Venture’s board and accounts for most of its business activity.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
UMGC Business Initiatives (Finding 1)
We identified certain activities that raise questions as to whether UMGC’s
relationship with Ventures and its affiliates is in the best interest of UMGC
and the State.
 UMGC has not conducted a comprehensive and documented,
evaluation, including a cost benefit analysis of whether the HIEDA’s are
meeting their intended purpose, goals, and objectives, in the most cost
effective manner.
 UMGC has been the source for almost all of AccelerEd’s revenue since
its creation in 2017.
 UMGC could not explain critical aspects of Ventures’ sale of a controlling
interest in HelioCampus in December 2019.
 Ventures made a $1.1 million capital contribution to HelioCampus after
the sale of the controlling interest that was not subject to review and
approval by UMGC.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
UMGC Business Initiatives (Finding 2)
UMGC obtained IT services from Ventures and its subsidiaries totaling
approximately $184.1 million during November 2018 to December 2022
without using a competitive procurement process and without any
verification that the amounts paid were proper.
 UMGC depended solely on Ventures to ensure that the best qualified
and most advantageous vendor was obtained for required IT tasks and
did not attempt to competitively procure the IT services.
 Invoices received did not include a breakdown of costs incurred and
services provided for the period, restricting UMGC’s ability to monitor
those costs and services which it received from Ventures.
 UMGC did not verify the propriety of contingency fees charged by
AccelerEd. The agreement included a contingency fee of 10 percent of
total costs, which totaled $11.3 million between fiscal years 2020 and
2023.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
UMGC Business Initiatives (Finding 3)
UMGC did not adequately monitor an IT project being developed for
its use by Ventures, which was ultimately determined to be unusable
and abandoned after UMGC expended $25.7 million.
 In July 2018 contracted with AccelerEd (through Ventures) to
replace its student information system. AccelerEd subcontracted
the work to a third party.
 The project was stopped and cancelled in June of 2021 after an
independent vendor prepared a report outlining significant
deficiencies with the current status and direction of the project.
 The report expressed concerns regarding basic project governance
exercised by Ventures on UMGC’s behalf and advised that the
current structure had prevented any real oversight by UMGC.
 UMGC did not pursue a refund or impose liquidated damages.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Advertising Contracts (Finding 4)
UMGC did not have formal documented procedures for assigning
work to pre-qualified vendors for two master contracts totaling $500
million, and related statements of work were not sufficiently detailed
to allow for effective monitoring by UMGC.
 UMGC’s selection process was not documented to ensure that the
most cost-effective selection had been made for each task.
 Statements of Work’s (SOW) did not include the specific services
or deliverables to be performed, such as the number of
commercials to be aired, which precluded effective monitoring,
 SOW’s did not include performance measures to enable UMGC to
determine how successful the advertising services were in
increasing enrollment.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Advertising Contracts (Finding 5)
UMGC did not adequately justify two sole source procurements of
advertising services and did not consolidate the procurements which
we believe circumvented USM Procurement Policies and Procedures.
 During fiscal years 2020 through 2023, UMGC repeatedly entered
into annual sole source contracts with the vendor for $475,000
and $300,000.
 UMGC’s sole source justifications noted that it could contract with
other advertising vendors, but that this vendor was the only source
with the level of market coverage. Our cursory search identified at
least one other vendor, with similar services.
 The justifications also inferred that price was a consideration,
even though price is not to be considered a factor in justifying a
sole source procurement.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 6 – Cash Receipts
UMGC did not adequately control and account for collections, which
totaled $7.3 million in fiscal year 2022.
Finding 7– Student Residency Status
UMGC’s procedures for reviewing residency changes were not
sufficiently comprehensive, resulting in 67 percent of residency
changes not being subject to independent review and approval.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
Our audit of UMGC identified numerous weaknesses in UMGC’s
business initiatives and advertising contracts. We made detailed
recommendations to UMGC and we will assess the status of the
recommendations during the course of our next audit.
We are happy to answer any questions.
University of Maryland Global Campus Page 13