Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Date: 11/25/2024
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=674e12c61a4bba4c1c5078ad
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:12:21.425718
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
November 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 25, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
for the period beginning April 1, 2018 and ending December 31, 2023. Through
its correctional institutions and parole and probation programs, DPSCS has
statewide responsibility for the supervision and rehabilitation of incarcerated
individuals and paroled individuals.
This report addresses concerns identified during our recent audit of the central
operations of DPSCS regarding DPSCS’ procurement and monitoring of the
medical, mental health, and pharmaceutical contracts used to provide
comprehensive healthcare services to its pretrial and resident populations. A
separate report on our audit of the central operations of DPSCS was issued on
September 17, 2024. During the audit period DPSCS had a significant vacancy
rate, which may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
Our audit disclosed numerous issues with DPSCS’ procurements of the three
healthcare contracts. For example, the medical and mental health contract
solicitations did not establish adequate hourly rates to ensure that the contractors
could recruit and retain a sufficient number of health professionals and DPSCS
could not support that the number of health professionals required by the contracts
was sufficient to ensure that incarcerated individuals received satisfactory
services. Furthermore, DPSCS awarded the medical and mental health contracts
despite significant concerns with the contractors’ ability to provide the services,
failed to disclose the concerns to the Board of Public Works and did not develop a
contingency plan in the event the contractors could not fulfill the contract
requirements.

--- Page 4 ---
DPSCS did not ensure the medical and mental health contractors completed
critical health exams within the required timeframes and we noted a significant
number of exams were not completed. For example, between July and September
2023, the mental health contractor did not complete 548 suicide risk evaluations
and 682 mental health exams. The failure to complete these exams is significant
because they enable DPSCS to address the needs of incarcerated individuals.
DPSCS also did not ensure that the medical contractor resolved complaints filed
by incarcerated individuals properly and timely. Our testing disclosed that the
contractor did not maintain adequate documentation of its investigations and did
not always resolve the complaints timely.
Our audit disclosed that DPSCS did not verify that the staffing levels reported by
the medical and mental health contractors were accurate and did not follow up
when errors in the reported data were identified. DPSCS also did not ensure
amounts invoiced and paid for pharmaceuticals reflected actual pharmaceuticals
provided by the contractor.
DPSCS did not document the basis for a $20 million settlement agreement with
the medical contractor that waived liquidated damages totaling at least $40.5
million and reduced the contract staffing requirements by 15 percent (132
positions). For example, DPSCS could not substantiate how the settlement
amount was determined and the extent to which the liquidated damages it waived
offset the amount that DPSCS paid to the contractor. DPSCS also could not
explain how it determined these 132 positions were no longer necessary nor did
DPSCS obtain approval from the Board of Public Works when it reduced the
staffing requirements of the contract.
DPSCS did not assess liquidated damages on the mental health contract as
provided for in the contract, and damages assessed on the medical contract were
significantly lower than provided for in the related contract. Specifically, DPSCS
waived $10.5 million in liquidated damages assessable to the mental health
contractor between March 2022 and January 2024 to allow the contractor to use
these funds to recruit and retain additional medical professionals. DPSCS did not
determine the costs associated with the contractor’s recruiting and retention
efforts and did not formally modify the contract to reflect these additional costs.
For the medical contract, the methodology DPSCS used to assess liquidated
damages resulted in an overall lower assessment than the methodology specified
by the contract. For example, DPSCS’ methodology resulted in it assessing
$809,000 less than allowed by the contract between October and December 2023.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
2

--- Page 5 ---
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of one of the six
findings contained in our preceding DPSCS audit report. We determined that
DPSCS satisfactorily addressed this finding.
DPSCS’ response to this audit is included as an Appendix B to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of DPSCS’ response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding. We have also edited the response to
remove certain vendor names or products, as allowed by our policy.
In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while DPSCS
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified several
instances in which statements in the response conflict or disagree with the report
findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation,
and reaffirmed the validity of our finding.
In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included general “auditor’s comments” in Appendix A in relation to DPSCS’
disagreements with the report findings. In relation to those significant instances
in which DPSCS did not agree with specific information included in the report
finding, we have also inserted “auditor’s comments” within DPSCS’ response to
explain our position.
We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding
issues that we cannot resolve with DPSCS. Notwithstanding the aforementioned
disagreements, we wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the
3

--- Page 6 ---
audit by DPSCS, its agreement with our recommendations, and willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Health Service Contracts 8
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 10
Contract Procurement
Finding 1 – DPSCS did not structure the medical and mental health 10
procurements to ensure that it obtained adequate healthcare services
for incarcerated individuals and could not justify that the payment
structure was the most advantageous to the State.
Finding 2 – DPSCS awarded the medical and mental health contracts 12
despite significant concerns identified with the contract proposals.
DPSCS did not disclose these concerns to the Board of Public Works
(BPW) and did not develop a contingency plan in the event the
contractors were unable to fulfill the contract requirements.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 3 – DPSCS did not adequately monitor healthcare contractors to 15
ensure critical health examinations were completed within the
required timeframes.
Finding 4 – DPSCS did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure 17
that the medical contractor properly and timely resolved complaints
filed by incarcerated individuals.
Finding 5 – DPSCS did not verify that the staffing levels reported by the 18
medical and mental health contractors were accurate and did not
follow up when errors in the reported data were identified.
Finding 6 – DPSCS did not have procedures to ensure amounts invoiced 19
and paid for pharmaceuticals reflected actual pharmaceuticals provided
by the contractor.
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 20
5

--- Page 8 ---
Contract Settlement
Finding 8 – DPSCS did not document the basis for a $20 million 20
settlement agreement with the medical contractor that also waived
liquidated damages totaling at least $40.5 million, and significantly
reduced the staffing requirements. In addition, DPSCS did not obtain
BPW approval for the settlement as required.
Liquidated Damages
Finding 9 – DPSCS did not assess liquidated damages on the mental 22
health contract as provided for in the contract, and damages assessed
on the medical contract were significantly lower than provided for in
the related contract.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 24
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Inmate Healthcare Findings in OLA Audit 27
Reports Issued January 1, 2007 to August 31, 2024
Auditor’s Comments Appendix A
Agency Response Appendix B
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Through its correctional institutions and parole and probation programs, the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has statewide
responsibility for the supervision and rehabilitation of incarcerated and paroled
individuals. DPSCS also sets standards for criminal justice training and operates
criminal justice information systems.
As further described below, DPSCS has agreements with third-party contractors
to provide comprehensive healthcare services to its incarcerated population. Our
recent DPSCS – Central Operations audit identified significant concerns with the
procurement and monitoring of these contracts. Similar issues regarding these
contracts have been addressed in OLA’s routine fiscal compliance audits, a
special review, and a performance audit dating back to February 2007 (see
Exhibit 1). As a result, we excluded these contracts from that audit and expanded
the scope of our review during this audit to provide the necessary audit resources
and coverage.
As noted in Figure 1 on the following page, according to the State’s records,
during fiscal year 2023, DPSCS expenditures totaled approximately $1.55 billion.
Personnel costs accounted for the majority of these expenditures. During the
period December 31, 2019 through June 30, 2023, DPSCS had vacancy rates that
ranged from 13.1 percent to 21.5 percent. As of June 30, 2023, approximately
13.1 percent of the total 9,220 positions were vacant. These vacancies may have
contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
DPSCS Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 8,009 86.9%
Frozen1 4 0.0%
Vacant 1,207 13.1%
Total 9,220
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe
Benefits $1,035,394,397 66.9%
Technical and Special Fees 8,356,870 0.5%
Operating Expenses 503,884,514 32.6%
Total $1,547,635,781
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $1,403,247,440 90.7%
Special Fund 94,641,496 6.1%
Federal 42,383,488 2.7%
Reimbursable Fund 7,363,357 0.5%
Total $1,547,635,781
Source: State financial records and DPSCS personnel records
Healthcare Service Contracts
According to DPSCS records, as of June 2023, there was a daily average
population of 17, 673 individuals incarcerated (pretrial and sentenced) in DPSCS’
18 detention and correctional facilities. DPSCS is responsible for the healthcare
delivery system that provides comprehensive primary, secondary, specialty
health, and hospitalization services. The healthcare delivery system includes
medical, mental health, pharmaceutical, and dental services that were provided
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Agencies
were not authorized to fill frozen positions according to budgetary instructions from the
Department of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not
been filled since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
8

--- Page 11 ---
through four contracts with initial award amounts totaling approximately $1.15
billion. In December 2023, DPSCS processed no-cost contract modifications for
both the medical and mental health contracts extending the contracts through
March 2024. In March 2024, DPSCS requested additional contract modifications
to the medical and mental health contracts to allow sufficient time to complete
new procurements for these services (see Figure 2).
This audit focused on the procurement and monitoring associated with the
medical, mental health, and pharmaceutical contracts that collectively accounted
for $1.05 billion (97 percent) of DPSCS’ healthcare expenditures. In June 2024,
subsequent to the period covered by this review, DPSCS finalized two
procurements to replace the existing medical and mental health contracts. The
new medical and mental health contracts will be subject to review during our next
DPSCS Central Operations audit.
Figure 2
DPSCS Health Care Contracts
($ in millions)
Original Contract Total Payments
Original Modified
Type Contract Modifica- Contract as of June
Contract Term Contract Term
Amount tions Amount 30, 2024
January 2019 - January 2024 -
Medical $680.0 $160.0 $840.0 $732.7
December 2023 December 2024
January 2018 - January 2024 -
Mental Health 155.6 26.4 182.0 157.3
December 2023 December 2024
January 2020 -
Pharmaceutical 250.0 - 250.0 161.5
December 2024
January 2022 -
Dental 67.6 - 67.6 29.1
January 2027
Totals $1,153.2 $186.4 $1,339.6 $1,080.6
Source: DPSCS records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of one of the six
findings contained in our November 20, 2019 audit report of DPSCS Central
Operations. We determined that DPSCS satisfactorily addressed this finding.
The status of the remaining five findings were addressed in our DPSCS Central
Operations audit report dated September 17, 2024.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Procurements
Finding 1
DPSCS did not structure the medical and mental health procurements to
ensure that it obtained adequate healthcare services for incarcerated
individuals and could not justify that the payment structure was the most
advantageous to the State.
Analysis
DPSCS did not structure the medical and mental health procurements to ensure
that it obtained adequate healthcare services for incarcerated individuals and
could not justify that the payment structure was the most advantageous to the
State.
Contract Payment Methodology Was Not Justified
DPSCS could not justify the use of a fixed fee payment structure for the medical
and mental health services contracts, resulting in a lack of assurance that these
services were obtained at the most advantageous prices. Under the contracts,
DPSCS paid a fixed fee to cover the cost of staffing, medical equipment and
supplies, certain inpatient hospital visits, and the contractors’ overhead and profit.
DPSCS advised that it selected the fixed fee structure based on its survey of
healthcare contracts in other states and because this methodology transferred cost
overruns to the contractors. However, DPSCS could not document this survey
and we found fixed fee contracts were not commonly used by other states.
A fixed fee model for these services may not be in the State’s best interest
because it guaranteed the contractors payment regardless of the level of staffing
provided and the actual costs incurred for equipment, supplies, and hospital visits.
Furthermore, we noted that under this model DPSCS’ healthcare costs increased
from $120 million to $168.7 million (41 percent) between fiscal year 2018 and
2023 even though the average number of individuals incarcerated during this
period declined by 18 percent.2
2 Specifically, the average number of incarcerated individuals decreased from 21,632 in 2018 to
17,673 in 2023.
10

--- Page 13 ---
DPSCS also could not document that it considered other payment structures. In
this regard, a New York University Law Review3 published in November 2020
found that healthcare providers within correctional facilities across the country,
including Maryland’s medical service contractor, typically employ a capitation
model where a flat rate is paid for each incarcerated individual. The Law Review
also noted certain providers used a cost-plus model which reimburses the
contractor for actual expenses plus a fee-for-profit margin, thus providing
transparency.
Staffing Level Requirements Were Not Supported and Were Inconsistent
DPSCS could not support that the staffing levels established in the contract were
sufficient to provide the required medical and mental health services to
incarcerated individuals. The request for proposals (RFPs) for these contracts
specified the number of health professionals the contractors were to provide at
each DPSCS facility. DPSCS could not explain how it developed these
requirements and we found that the ratio of medical health professionals to
incarcerated individuals varied significantly between facilities. For example, the
ratio of incarcerated individuals for each registered nurse (RN) under the medical
contract ranged from 12 to 502 depending on the facility.4 This is significant
because insufficient staffing may have contributed to the contractors’ failure to
perform numerous required medical and mental health examinations (see Finding
3).
Hourly Rate Requirements Were Not Established
The solicitations did not establish adequate hourly rates for the medical and
mental health professionals who directly provided services to incarcerated
individuals to ensure that the contractors could recruit and retain a sufficient
number of staff. Specifically, the solicitations only required the contractors to pay
the health professionals more than the State’s hourly living wage (for example,
$14.24 at the time the medical contract was awarded). As detailed further in
Finding 2, our review disclosed certain rates proposed by the contractors selected
for award were significantly below the statewide average for the position. The
failure to establish sufficient hourly rates may have contributed, at least in part, to
the contractors’ inability to meet the required staffing levels at any point during
the contract period.
3 The New York University Law Review Mismanaged Care: Exploring the Costs and Benefits of
Private vs. Public Healthcare in Correctional Facilities (November 2020) analyzed the
effectiveness and drawbacks of privatized versus public healthcare systems within correctional
facilities.
4 At one facility there was 17 RNs for 201 incarcerated individuals and at the other facility there
was 1 RN for the 502 incarcerated individuals.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Performance Bonds Were Not Required
DPSCS did not require the medical and mental health contractors to obtain
performance bonds to ensure the State was protected in the event the contractor
did not fulfill their contractual obligations. State law authorizes agencies to
require performance bonds for service contracts exceeding $100,000.
Performance bonds were warranted for these procurements given the past
performance issues under these contracts in general (see Exhibit 1), and
specifically with the selected medical contractor that had performance issues
under a prior contract with DPSCS spanning from 2005 through 2012.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPSCS
a. consider alternative payment structures (such as a capitation model) for
future procurements of healthcare services, and ensure the methodology
selected is in the State’s best interest;
b. document the basis for staffing requirements at each facility, including a
determination that the staffing levels are sufficient to ensure incarcerated
individuals receive adequate healthcare services;
c. ensure minimum hourly rates paid to medical and mental health
professionals are competitive with similar positions within the State; and
d. require performance bonds for incarcerated individual healthcare
contracts.
Finding 2
DPSCS awarded the medical and mental health contracts despite significant
concerns with the contract proposals. DPSCS did not disclose these concerns
to the Board of Public Works (BPW) and did not develop a contingency plan
in the event the contractors were unable to fulfill the contract requirements.
Analysis
DPSCS awarded the medical and mental health contracts despite significant
concerns with the contract proposals. DPSCS did not disclose these concerns to
the BPW and did not develop a contingency plan in the event the contractors were
unable to fulfill the contract requirements.
Medical and Mental Health Contracts Awarded Despite Concerns
DPSCS’ evaluations of the contractors’ proposals expressed concerns with the
contractors’ ability to recruit and retain the required level of staff. While the
12

--- Page 15 ---
evaluations did not elaborate on these concerns, our analysis5 found that the
hourly rates paid by the contractors for certain key positions (including those that
were directly responsible for performing critical exams of incarcerated
individuals) were significantly below the statewide average (see Figure 3 on the
following page). For example, in calendar year 2023, a registered nurse
employed by the medical contractor would have been paid $25,500 less than the
statewide average.
DPSCS’ evaluation of the medical contractor also noted that the three states the
contractor listed as references had advised DPSCS that the contractor had
challenges providing staff, and that the contractor had recently terminated
contracts with other states. We determined that at least one of these contracts was
terminated due to its inability to provide the required staff.
Despite these concerns, DPSCS moved forward with awarding the contracts to the
respective contractors. There was no documentation to support this decision or
any other considerations such as resoliciting for these services.
5 We compared the contractor’s minimum hourly rates to the average hourly rate for the State of
Maryland (according to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics) for 5 positions under each contract.
These positions accounted for 68 percent and 73 percent of the total staff to be provided by the
medical and mental contractors, respectively.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 3
Comparison of Contractor Rates and Statewide Average for Calendar Year 2023
Statewide Difference Annualized
Contract
Required Average Difference
Position Minimum Hourly
Positions Hourly Percent Per
Hourly Rate Rate
Rate Position
Medical Services
Licensed Practical Nurses 217 $22.86 $31.95 $(9.09) (28%) $(18,917)
Registered Nurses 173 33.45 44.27 (10.82) (32%) (25,512)
Nurse Practitioners and
45 55.74 56.39 (0.65) (1%) (1,342)
Physician Assistants
Medical Records Clerk 42 15.61 30.26 (14.65) (94%) (30,475)
Certified Nursing Assistant 28 15.61 19.60 (3.99) (26%) (8,302)
Mental Health Services
Registered Nurses 53 $34.88 $44.27 $(9.39) (21%) $(19,525)
Licensed Practical Nurses 43 24.29 31.95 (7.66) (24%) (15,933)
Licensed Clinical
21 25.20 29.74 (4.54) (15%) (9,440)
Professional Counselors
Psychiatrist 19 123.11 130.06 (6.95) (5%) (14,453)
Nurse Practitioner 10 73.37 61.54 11.83 19% 24,598
Source: Contractor Technical Proposals and the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
DPSCS Did Not Disclose Concerns with the Contractors to the BPW
DPSCS could not document that it disclosed the aforementioned concerns to the
BPW. DPSCS advised that the concerns may have been disclosed during
preliminary meetings with BPW staff but the DPSCS employees that were
responsible for the procurement are no longer with the agency. Moreover, BPW
questioned the medical contractor’s ability to perform satisfactorily without
having to increase the contract amount in the future, considering the financial
proposal submitted was $49.7 million lower than the incumbent contractor’s
proposal. DPSCS responded that “the procurement was competitive, and that the
contractor had demonstrated its ability to perform”. Given the aforementioned
concerns with the contractor’s proposal and its failure to provide the minimum
staffing and other deliverables during the entire contract period, DPSCS’
statements to BPW appeared unfounded.
DPSCS Did Not Develop a Contingency Plan
DPSCS did not establish a contingency plan in the event the contractors were
unable to meet the staffing requirements. For example, DPSCS did not develop a
14

--- Page 17 ---
plan to supplement the medical staffing in its facilities if the contractors were
unable to provide the required staff (such as hiring supplemental nurses and other
medical professionals). Given the prior history with these contracts and the
concerns noted during the procurement, a contingency plan may have helped to
address the staffing shortages and DPSCS could have pursued recovery of the
related costs from the contractors.
DPSCS also did not consider modifying the payment structure of the contract so
that it only paid for staff that were actually provided; as explained in Finding 1,
the fixed fee structure meant that the contractors were paid the full amount
regardless of the level of staffing they provided.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that for future procurements, DPSCS
a. document steps taken to address concerns identified during procurements
and the justification for awarding contracts despite the concerns;
b. disclose concerns when presenting awards to the BPW; and
c. develop a contingency plan to address concerns with the medical and
mental health contractors’ ability to provide the required services,
including its ability to recruit and retain medical professionals.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 3
DPSCS did not adequately monitor healthcare contractors to ensure critical
health examinations were completed within the required timeframes.
Analysis
DPSCS did not adequately monitor healthcare contractors to ensure critical health
examinations were completed within the required timeframes. The medical and
mental health contracts provided for several required exams for incarcerated
individuals (see Figure 4 on the following page). Our review disclosed the
following conditions related to DPSCS monitoring of the contractors’ compliance
with these exams.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 4
Summary of Required Exams for Incarcerated Individuals
Contractor Exam Type Exam Must Be Conducted Within
Medical Intake Screening 2 hours of arrival at a DPSCS facility
Medical Physical Exam 7 days of admission to a DPSCS facility
Mental Health Suicide Risk 24 hours of admission to a DPSCS facility or
Evaluation 72 hours of placement in special confinement
Mental Health Mental Health Exam 7 days of admission to a DPSCS facility
Source: DPSCS healthcare contracts
DPSCS Did Not Adequately Monitor Intake Screenings and Medical Exams
DPSCS did not adequately ensure that the medical contractor completed intake
screenings, properly performed physical exams, or ensure missing or incomplete
screenings and exams were completed. These screenings and exams are critical to
addressing the health needs of incarcerated individuals and protecting DPSCS’
incarcerated population and staff.
 As of July 2024, DPSCS only performed a review of intake screenings for one
month during the contract period to verify that they were completed by the
contractor. DPSCS also did not follow up with the contractor to ensure that
missing screenings identified by the review were subsequently completed.
Specifically, DPSCS reviewed 127 intakes at the five intake facilities during
December 2023 and found that 56 intake screenings were not completed
including 27 of the 30 incarcerated individuals at one facility. DPSCS could
not document that it addressed the missing screenings.
 As of July 2024, DPSCS had only reviewed physical exams performed during
3 months6 since the contract was initiated in 2019 and did not ensure
deficiencies identified by the reviews were corrected. In this regard, DPSCS’
review of 243 physical exams identified significant deficiencies with the
contractor exams, including the failure to test for tuberculosis and sexually
transmitted diseases (STD) and conduct required dental screenings. However,
DPSCS did not follow up with the medical contractor to ensure these tests
were subsequently performed.
6 DPSCS reviewed physical exams performed in September 2020, May 2022, and December 2023.
16

--- Page 19 ---
DPSCS Did Not Adequately Monitor Suicide Risk and Mental Health Exams
DPSCS did not ensure the mental health contractor completed suicide risk
evaluations and mental health exams. According to DPSCS records, between July
and September 2023, the
Figure 5
contractor was required to
complete 2,875 suicide risk Suicide Risk Evaluations and Mental Health
evaluations and 2,375 mental Examinations Not Completed
health exams. Although Between July and September 2023
DPSCS’ monthly reviews Count of Exams Not
identified that the contractor Individuals Who Completed
did not perform 548 suicide Exam Type Required Exam Count Percent
risk evaluations and 682 Suicide Risk
2,875 548 19%
mental health exams (see Evaluation
Figure 5), it did not follow up Mental
2,375 682 29%
to ensure these exams were Health Exam
subsequently completed. Source: DPSCS records
Our test of 10 of these individuals disclosed that as of June 2024, 8 individuals
still had not received either a suicide risk evaluation or mental health exam. The
failure to complete these exams is significant because they enable DPSCS to take
timely action to address the mental health needs of incarcerated individuals,
including those at higher risk of suicide.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPSCS develop comprehensive procedures to ensure
that the contractors properly complete critical medical and mental health
examinations within the required timeframes, including those noted above.
Finding 4
DPSCS did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that the medical
contractor properly and timely resolved medical related complaints filed by
incarcerated individuals.
Analysis
DPSCS did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that the medical
contractor properly and timely resolved medical related complaints filed by
incarcerated individuals. The nature of these complaints included concerns about
medication and medical treatment (for example, not receiving prescribed
medication or necessary medical treatment). Complaints are submitted to the
applicable facility which is responsible for forwarding the healthcare related
complaints to the applicable contractor for investigation. According to DPSCS
17

--- Page 20 ---
records, between May and October 2023 it forwarded 369 complaints to the
medical contractor for investigation. State regulations provide that these
complaints are to be investigated and resolved within 45 days of the date filed7
and that certain individuals be interviewed during the complaint investigation.
Our test of 18 complaints resolved by the medical contractor during this period
identified 17 complaints for which DPSCS could not document that the complaint
was investigated in accordance with State regulations. For example, the
contractor did not document that it interviewed the relevant medical professional
and/or incarcerated individual for 11 complaints, as required. Accordingly, we
were unable to verify that these complaints were properly resolved.
Additionally, 10 of the 18 complaints were resolved between 1 to 6 months late.
For example, one complaint submitted in June 2023, regarding the medical
contractor’s failure to perform STD related testing even though the individual was
experiencing symptoms, was not resolved until January 2024. DPSCS could not
support that it had followed up with the contractor to address the untimely
resolution of these complaints.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPSCS establish procedures to ensure, at least on a test
basis, that incarcerated individuals’ complaints are properly investigated
and resolved timely.
Finding 5
DPSCS did not verify that the staffing levels reported by the medical and
mental health contractors were accurate and did not follow up when errors
in the reported data were identified.
Analysis
DPSCS did not verify that the staffing levels reported by the medical and mental
health contractors were accurate and did not follow up when errors in the reported
data were identified.8 The contractors provided monthly staffing reports which
were used by DPSCS to determine contractors’ compliance with the staffing
requirements. While the contracts were structured so that actual staffing did not
impact the amounts paid, these staffing reports were the primary means for
7 State regulations provide that complaints are to be investigated within 30 days of the date files
and allows the managing official to grant an extension of 15 days under certain conditions.
8 A similar finding was included in our September 2017 Monitoring of Contractor Performance
for the Assessment of Liquidated Damages Under the Inmate Medical Healthcare Services
Contract report (see Exhibit 1).
18

--- Page 21 ---
DPSCS to monitor the staffing provided by the contractors and take timely and
appropriate follow up action including assessing liquidated damages as further
discussed in Finding 9.
Our review disclosed that DPSCS did not make any attempts to verify the
reported staffing on the medical contract and only verified the staffing for the
mental health contract once in July 2020. In addition, DPSCS did not attempt to
resolve discrepancies identified by the July 2020 review. For example, DPSCS
found instances in which the employees and hours worked on the monthly staffing
report did not agree to the contractor’s timekeeping system. As a result, there was
a lack of assurance that staffing reports provided by the contractor were accurate.
Recommendation 5
We recommend DPSCS verify the accuracy of contractor supplied staffing
reports and follow up when errors in the reported data are identified.
Finding 6
DPSCS did not have procedures to ensure amounts invoiced and paid for
pharmaceuticals reflected actual pharmaceuticals provided by the
contractor.
Analysis
DPSCS did not have procedures to ensure amounts invoiced and paid for
pharmaceuticals reflected actual pharmaceuticals provided by the contractor. The
contractor invoiced DPSCS for pharmaceuticals delivered to the various DPSCS
facilities. Our review disclosed that DPSCS did not have procedures to confirm
that the invoiced pharmaceuticals were received by the respective facilities.
According to DPSCS records, payments to the pharmaceutical contractor totaled
$161.5 million as June 30, 2024.
We selected 10 payments9 for pharmaceuticals totaling $7.6 million made
between October and December 2023 and requested documentation (such as
receiving reports) to support that the pharmaceuticals paid for were actually
received. As of September 2024, DPSCS could not support these payments.
Specifically, DPSCS advised that it could not readily verify that these 10
payments corresponded to pharmaceuticals provided by the contractor.
9 We selected payments based upon the materiality of the payment, the 10 payments selected for testing
represented 96-percent of the payments during the three-month period between October and December
2023.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DPSCS establish procedures to verify that
pharmaceuticals invoiced were received by the facilities, including those
noted above.
We determined that Finding 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with DPSCS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Contract Settlement
Finding 8
DPSCS did not document the basis for a $20 million settlement agreement
with the medical contractor that also waived liquidated damages totaling at
least $40.5 million and significantly reduced the contract staffing
requirements. In addition, DPSCS did not obtain BPW approval for the
settlement as required.
Analysis
DPSCS did not document the basis and obtain required BPW approval for a
settlement agreement with the medical contractor. Between October 2019 and
October 2022, the contractor filed 17 claims requesting additional compensation
totaling $142.9 million generally related to the delayed contract start, increased
offsite care and diagnostic expenses, reimbursement for payments by third parties,
and the COVID-19 public health emergency. In March 2023, DPSCS entered into
a settlement agreement with the contractor, under which DPSCS paid the
contractor $20 million, waived liquidated damages assessable from the start of the
contract (January 2019) through June 2023, and reduced the staff to be provided
by the contractor by 132 positions (15 percent) for the remainder of the contract
term.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Settlement Amount and Cost of Waived Damages Not Supported
DPSCS could not support the $20 million settlement payment and the cost of the
waived liquidated damages. While DPSCS advised us that it entered into the
settlement because it was not cost-beneficial to pursue litigation, DPSCS could
not provide documentation to support this assertion. DPSCS also could not
substantiate how the settlement amount was determined, including the total
liquidated damages it waived and the extent to which this amount offset the
amount that DPSCS paid the contractor. According to DPSCS records, liquidated
damages for the period from January 2019 through October 2021 totaled at least
$40.5 million; DPSCS did not determine the liquidated damages assessable
between November 2021 and June 2023.
No Documentation to Support Reduced Staffing Levels
DPSCS could not support its decision to significantly reduce the staffing
requirements in the contract. DPSCS management advised us that the declining
population of incarcerated individuals meant that fewer medical professionals
were needed. However, DPSCS could not explain how it determined that these
132 positions were no longer necessary and that the reduced staffing levels were
sufficient to ensure incarcerated individuals received adequate care. Furthermore,
DPSCS did not reduce the amount paid to the contractor to account for the
eliminated positions.
No BPW Approval
DPSCS did not obtain approval from BPW for reducing the staffing levels
required by the contract. DPSCS’s management advised us that BPW approval
was not required because DPSCS has the authority to settle contract claims and
this change was included in the aforementioned settlement agreement. However,
BPW officials advised us that the reduction of staffing could be considered a
significant modification to the scope of the contract. State regulations require
contract modifications that materially change the scope of the original contract or
individually change any cost component of the contract by more than $50,000 to
be reported to BPW for approval.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DPSCS
a. document the basis for executing contract settlements, including the cost
benefit of the settlement;
b. maintain documentation to support that contract modifications are
reasonable and in the best interest of the State; and
c. obtain approval from BPW prior to executing significant contract
modifications that change the scope of services.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Liquidated Damages
Finding 9
DPSCS did not assess liquidated damages on the mental health contract as
provided for in the contract, and damages assessed on the medical contract
were significantly lower than provided for in the related contract.
Analysis
DPSCS did not assess liquidated damages on the mental health contract as
provided for in the contract, and damages assessed on the medical contract were
significantly lower than provided for in the related contract. The contracts
provided that liquidated damages would be assessed when the contractors did not
provide at least 96 percent of the required staffing for each position at each
DPSCS facility. According to staffing reports provided by the contractors, neither
contractor provided the required staffing levels in any month of their respective
contract terms.
Liquidated Damages Were Not Assessed to the Mental Health Contract
DPSCS did not assess the mental health contractor liquidated damages totaling
approximately $10.5 million between March 2022 and January 2024. In August
2022, the contractor advised that the COVID-19 pandemic had adversely
impacted its ability to provide the required staffing and requested DPSCS to
waive liquidated damages from March 2022 through the remainder of the contract
term so that it could use these funds for recruiting and retention.
DPSCS granted the request without an analysis to determine the actual costs
associated with the contractor’s recruiting and retention efforts to determine if this
request was reasonable and without a formal contract modification to reflect the
current costs. DPSCS advised us that it considered a formal modification to be
unnecessary because the contract permitted it to waive liquidated damages for
circumstances beyond the contractor’s control.
Our review disclosed that the contractor provided 81 percent or less of the
required staffing in each month since March 2022. Accordingly, we believe
DPSCS’ decision to waive its primary mechanism for holding the contractor
accountable (liquidated damages) for a nearly two-year period was not justified.
As of January 2024, DPSCS could have assessed liquidated damages totaling
$10.5 million based on the contractor’s reported staffing levels during this period.
Furthermore, BPW officials advised us that waiving future liquidated damages
could be considered a significant change to the contract scope, which would
require a formal contract modification and BPW approval.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Liquidated Damages Were Not Properly Calculated for the Medical Contract
DPSCS assessed the medical contractor liquidated damages based on the
statewide staffing levels for each position instead of on a per-position basis at
each facility as stipulated in the contract.10 The use of a statewide approach
means that facilities with full staffing offset vacancies at other facilities, which
reduces the overall liquidated damage assessment. For example, this approach
resulted in DPSCS failing to assess liquidated damages totaling $809,000 between
October and December 2023.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DPSCS
a. assess liquidated damages in accordance with the contracts, and
b. consult with its legal counsel and determine the feasibility of assessing
additional liquidated damages for instances in which the original amount
was not calculated in accordance with the contract or was based on
inaccurate staffing reports.
10 DPSCS is responsible for 18 detention and correctional facilities. According to the contract
certain facilities had more than one healthcare service unit, in which staffing requirements were
separately required.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
for the period beginning April 1, 2018 and ending December 31, 2023.11 The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DPSCS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit only included the procurement and monitoring of health
care service contracts administered by DPSCS. We also determined the status of
one of the six findings contained in our audit report of DPSCS Central Operations
dated November 11, 2019.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of the disbursement and procurement
transactions (other than incarcerated individual healthcare contracts), and any
other major financial-related areas which were addressed in our DPSCS Central
Operations audit. In addition, our audit did not include the computer operations
of the DPSCS Information and Technology and Communications Division and the
Maryland Correctional Enterprises, which are audited separately. Our audit also
did not include incarcerated individual cash receipts, incarcerated individual
funds, other earnings and overtime payments related to the Division of Correction
employees, and usage of a biometric timekeeping system by correctional officers;
these activities are audited during our DPSCS regional operations audit.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
11 Our recent DPSCS – Central Operations audit covered the period between April 1, 2018 and
May 31, 2022. As a result of significant concerns with the procurement and monitoring of
DPSCS’s healthcare contracts we expanded the scope of review during this audit to provide
coverage through December 31, 2023.
24

--- Page 27 ---
period of April 1, 2018 through December 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the DPSCS’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DPSCS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DPSCS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DPSCS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DPSCS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DPSCS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The DPSCS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of
its response.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Inmate Healthcare Findings in OLA Audit Reports
Issued January 1, 2007 to August 31, 2024 (Page 1 of 2)
Audit Findings
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – Central Operations –
Report Issued November 20, 2019
Finding 2 – DPSCS did not conduct a documented review of consumer price index
adjustments for the inmate medical and mental health contracts. We noted errors resulting in
overpayments totaling $1 million.
DPSCS – Monitoring of Contractor Performance for the Assessment of Liquidated Damages
Under the Inmate Medical Healthcare Services Contract – Report Issued September 12, 2017
Finding 1 – During fiscal year 2016, the Office of Inmate Health Clinical Services had not
established processes to pursue liquidated damages for contractor noncompliance regarding
the timeliness of an inmates' initial reception/intake examination (RIE) and the administration
of medications.
Finding 2 – High staffing vacancy rates in some service delivery areas during fiscal year
2016 suggest that liquidated damages should be assessed at that level rather than on a
statewide level to ensure quality of care is not compromised.
Finding 3 – DPSCS, based on contractor supplied data, routinely assessed liquidated
damages for the contractor's failure to meet required staffing levels, but improvements are
necessary to ensure the reliability of that data.
Finding 4 – Contractor reports were not verified nor used to assess liquidated damages for
RIEs identified as untimely, and those reports did not contain data to determine the full
extent of untimely RIEs that may have occurred.
Finding 5 – A process had not been established to assess liquidated damages when
medication was not administered timely or the administration was not documented in the
medical records, even though there were indications of some problems with contractor
performance.
Finding 6 – The lack of automated reports was an impediment to effectively determining the
full extent of contractor noncompliance for purposes of assessing liquidated damages for RIE
and medication administration.
Finding 7 – DPSCS did not make use of a sampling methodology, as permitted by the
contract, for purposes of determining compliance with contract provisions and assessing
liquidated damages.
DPSCS – Office of the Secretary and Other Units – Report Issued November 18, 2015
Finding 3 – The Office did not assess its inmate mental healthcare contractor with liquidated
damages, totaling $840,000, for not meeting required staffing levels. In addition, the Office
authorized an increase in staffing levels for more than a year before modifying the contract
and seeking Board of Public Works approval.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Inmate Healthcare Findings in OLA Audit Reports
Issued January 1, 2007 to August 31, 2024 (Page 2 of 2)
Audit Findings
DPSCS – Office of the Secretary and Other Units – Report Issued September 15, 2010
Finding 1 – Critical data necessary for adequately monitoring certain significant contracts
were not sufficiently verified.
Performance Audit Report – Inmate Healthcare – Report Issued February 21, 2007
Finding 1 – Staffing levels provided, as reported by the medical contractor, should be
periodically verified to supporting documentation.
Finding 2 – OIHS should closely monitor contractor compliance with pre–approved work
schedules.
Finding 3 – OIHS should determine the appropriate contractor staffing levels needed to
provide all required services to inmates.
Finding 4 – Medical exams of arrestees should be completed within seven days of arrest as
required.
Finding 5 – A process should be put in place to ensure that inmates with chronic medical
conditions receive appropriate treatment as required.
Finding 6 – Corrective actions should be taken to address reported healthcare deficiencies.
Finding 7 – A methadone detoxification program should be implemented as required.
Finding 8 – Action should be taken to address identified service delivery problems and
medical contractor reports should be verified for reliability.
Finding 9 – A timely independent review should be conducted of the adequacy of care
rendered subsequent to each inmate death.
Finding 10 – OIHS should ensure that all significant healthcare violations and performance
deficiencies are identified and documented timely and that full liquidated damages are
assessed as soon as practical.
Finding 11 – Outstanding issues delaying the implementation of the electronic patient records
computer system need to be resolved.
Finding 12 – Actions should be taken to address contractor–reported weaknesses in
coordination.
28

--- Page 31 ---
APPENDIX A
Auditor’s Comments on DPSCS’ Response
Although the written responses provided by DPSCS indicated general agreement
with our findings and recommendations, the responses included certain
disagreements with Findings 1 and 2 of our report. DPSCS continues to
characterize the medical and mental health contracts as successful procurements
despite the deficiencies identified in our analysis and the performance issues with
both contractors, most critically the consistent failure to provide the minimum
staffing and properly complete key health examinations of incarcerated
individuals.
After reviewing the areas of disagreement, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation and reaffirmed the validity of our findings and related
recommendations. We continue to believe that the findings and conclusions
contained in the audit report are factually accurate, fairly presented, and properly
supported in accordance with government auditing standards. Although we
reviewed each response in its entirety, we did not deem it necessary to provide a
point-by-point rebuttal, but rather provided the Auditor’s Comments to certain
DPSCS responses.

--- Page 32 ---
APPENDIX B
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
6776 Reisterstown Road, Baltimore, Maryland 21215
410-585-3346 – TOLL FREE 877-379-8636 • www.dpscs.maryland.gov
STATE OF MARYLAND November 21, 2024
WES MOORE
GOVERNOR
ARUNA MILLER
LT. GOVERNOR
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
CAROLYN J. SCRUGGS
Legislative Auditor
SECRETARY
Office of Legislative Audits
ANTHONY A. GASKINS
CHIEF OF STAFF Department of Legislative Services
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
JOSEPH SEDTAL
DEPUTY SECRETARY 351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
ADMINISTRATION
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
ANNIE D. HARVEY
DEPUTY SECRETARY
OPERATIONS
Dear Mr. Tanen:
ANGELINA GUARINO
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
DATA, POLICY AND GRANTS
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has reviewed
RENARD E. BROOKS
ASSISTANT SECRETARY the Draft Audit Report dated November 2024 for the DPSCS – Incarcerated Individual
PROGRAMS, TREATMENT & RE-
ENTRY SERVICES Healthcare Contracts. We appreciate the constructive findings and recommendations
that were made as the result of this audit.
Please find attached the Department’s itemized responses to the audit findings and
recommendations. The Department’s Office of the Inspector General will conduct
periodic follow up audits to monitor the status of compliance.
If you have any questions regarding this response, please contact me.
Sincerely,
Carolyn J. Scruggs
Secretary
Attachment
Copy: Adam Flasch, Deputy Chief of Staff for Public Safety and Homeland Security

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
Contract Procurements
Finding 1
DPSCS did not structure the medical and mental health procurements to
ensure that it obtained adequate healthcare services for incarcerated
individuals and could not justify that the payment structure was the most
advantageous to the State.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. consider alternative payment structures (such as a capitation model) for
future procurements of healthcare services, and ensure the methodology
selected is in the State’s best interest;
b. document the basis for staffing requirements at each facility, including a
determination that the staffing levels are sufficient to ensure incarcerated
individuals receive adequate healthcare services;
c. ensure minimum hourly rates paid to medical and mental health
professionals are competitive with similar positions within the State; and
d. require performance bonds for incarcerated individual healthcare
contracts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DPSCS offers the following comments:
additional comments as
deemed necessary. Contract Payment Methodology Was Not Justified
The DPSCS structured the medical and mental health procurements to
ensure that it obtained adequate healthcare services at the most
advantageous price. Furthermore, DPSCS adhered to the State
procurement process as required by COMAR Title 21. Discussions were
held by DPSCS to determine the payment methodology, but it is not
standard practice to document the decision process and discussions
related to how the payment methodology was determined.
Staffing Level Requirements Were Not Supported and Were
Inconsistent
It is inaccurate to say the staffing levels were “inconsistent.” The
staffing levels for the Mental Health Contract were determined based
upon the policies and processes for each facility, and based upon the
Page 1 of 14

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
needs of the incarcerated individual population at each facility. The
staffing requirements were set up to meet the individual needs of each
facility, and would not have been “consistent” as a result.
There is no standard staffing formula to determine whether staffing
levels for the Medical Contract are sufficient. The staffing plan was
discussed, determined, and incorporated into the scope of work created
with close review of the National Commission on Correctional
Healthcare (NCCHC), which did not provide an identifiable formula for
staffing.
The NCCHC manual on Standards for Health Services in prisons, and
Standards for Health Services in jails states “Staffing requires a
sufficient number of health staff of varying types to provide inmates
with adequate and timely evaluation and treatment, consistent with
contemporary standards of care. The responsible health authority must
approve the staffing plan and the adequacy and effectiveness of the
staffing plan should be assessed by the facility’s ability to meet the
health needs of the incarcerated population. The number and types of
qualified health care professionals required depends on the size of the
facility, the types and scope of health services delivered, the needs of the
inmate population and the organizational structure. It is not possible to
specify exact ratios, but the number of staff must be sufficient to ensure
that there are no unreasonable delays in patients receiving necessary
care.”
Hourly Rate Requirements Were Not Established
It is not a standard practice for the State to establish minimum hourly
rates in a solicitation. We solicited proposals and expected the Offerors
to be able to provide a competitive rate. The solicitation included a
Living Wage requirement because the solicitation exceeded $100,000
and was therefore Living Wage eligible per State law.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The DPSCS Procurement Office considers all payment structures when
corrective action or putting procurements out to bid. The current DOC and Pretrial contracts
explain disagreement. are a combination of a fixed price and fixed price incentive structure,
and this was determined to be the most appropriate and reasonable
method that is in the State's best interest.
Page 2 of 14

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The DPSCS will document, to the extent possible, the basis for staffing
corrective action or requirements at each facility, including a determination that the staffing
explain disagreement. levels are sufficient to ensure incarcerated individuals receive adequate
healthcare services. However, it should be noted that it is not a standard
practice to document all of the decision points made while drafting a
solicitation.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The new medical and mental health contracts required that the vendors
corrective action or be at the 75th% quartile for the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) hourly
explain disagreement. rate, which guarantees a competitive rate with similar positions within
the State.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of Performance bonds were incorporated within the most recently awarded
corrective action or medical and mental health contracts.
explain disagreement.
Auditor’s Comment: Although DPSCS agrees with the recommendations, it
disputes the conclusion that staffing levels established by the contracts were
inconsistent among facilities. As noted in our analysis, the ratio of medical health
professionals to incarcerated individuals varied significantly between facilities.
While we acknowledge that there may be plausible explanations for these
variances, neither the response nor the documentation provided by DPSCS at the
time of our review explains how the staffing levels were developed or how
DPSCS determined they were sufficient to ensure incarcerated individuals
received adequate services. Accordingly, we believe our finding is factually
accurate as presented in the report.
Finding 2
DPSCS awarded the medical and mental health contracts despite significant
concerns with the contract proposals. DPSCS did not disclose these concerns
to the Board of Public Works (BPW) and did not develop a contingency plan
in the event the contractors were unable to fulfill the contract requirements.
We recommend that for future procurements, DPSCS
a. document steps taken to address concerns identified during procurements
and the justification for awarding contracts despite the concerns;
b. disclose concerns when presenting awards to the BPW; and
Page 3 of 14

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
c. develop a contingency plan to address concerns with the medical and
mental health contractors’ ability to provide the required services,
including its ability to recruit and retain medical professionals.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DPSCS offers the following comments:
additional comments as
deemed necessary. The DPSCS took the most responsive and responsible offer it had
received that best aligned with the needs of the agency and the budget at
the time. It is understood that there may be concerns with all vendors
when reviewing and awarding contracts; however, after extensive review
by the Procurement Officer and the Evaluation Committee, the selected
vendor did not display any concerns that precluded them from being
awarded this contract.
Medical and Mental Health Contracts Awarded Despite Concerns
Although the review of proposals and completion of reference checks
are both part of the evaluation process, a distinction needs to be made
between the two. Reference checks are used by the Evaluation
Committee to determine whether the Offeror is responsible or not, but it
certainly is not the defining factor that determines the strength of a
proposal, as they are inherently based on opinions of other entities, not
facts.
The OLA report states that the DPSCS’ evaluations of the contractor’s
proposals expressed concerns with the contractor’s ability to recruit and
retain the required level of staff. However, DPSCS’ evaluations of what
would be the Successful Offeror’s proposal did not express concerns
about the Successful Offeror’s ability to recruit and retain the required
level of staff.
As part of the evaluation process, DPSCS completed a reference check
on all Offerors. The OLA reviewed the reference check notes from one
of the Evaluation Committee members and inaccurately determined that
references “advised DPSCS that the contractor had challenges providing
staff, and that the contractor had recently terminated contracts with other
states.” Actually, the reference check notes did not state that “the
contractor had recently terminated contracts with other states.” This is
something DPSCS found out after the fact and was not made aware of
during the evaluation period. In addition, the reference check notes
Page 4 of 14

--- Page 37 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
stated that the would-be Successful Offeror had the highest staffing
retention rate and excellent customer client relations. In comparison, the
notes said the other Offerors had fair to poor retention rates and fair to
good customer client relations. As for challenges encountered, the
reference check notes said the would-be Successful Offeror had some
challenges with the temporary staffing of on-call Registered Nurses;
however, the Evaluation Committee Member did not include this
challenge as having any impact on the contract award decision in their
final evaluation committee notes. As a result, it is not entirely accurate
for the OLA to report that the references advised DPSCS of challenges
providing staff.
The OLA report states that no documentation was drafted to support
DPSCS’ decision to award the contracts to respective contractors. This is
not accurate as Procurement Officer’s Determinations were prepared for
the Mental Health and Medical Health contracts justifying the
Procurement Officer’s decision to proceed with a contract award to the
Successful Offeror.
Finally, the OLA completed an analysis based upon hourly rates for
Calendar Year 2023 in Figure 3, but this analysis did not take into
account the long-term consequences COVID-19 had on the medical
field, which could not have possibly been predicted. The hourly rates
that should be compared in this chart should be from 2019, which is
what the Procurement Officer and Evaluation Committee based their
review of the proposals on, not any of the years that were in the future,
with unknown Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) rates. The information
used by the OLA to create Figure 3 would not have been available to
DPSCS when the procurement was being reviewed and awarded.
DPSCS Did Not Disclose Concerns with Contractors to the BPW
Only the most responsive and responsible bids/advantageous offers
received are provided with a contract award. The DPSCS would not
recommend the BPW to approve a contract award unless it believed it
met the criteria for an award. The evaluation committee did not have any
concerns with the Contractor’s proposal and therefore the Department
would not have had any concerns to present to the BPW.
DPSCS Did Not Develop a Contingency Plan
The Department did not have a reason at the time of contract award to
believe that the Successful Offeror would have difficulty recruiting and
hiring staff. As stated earlier, the COVID-19 pandemic had unexpected
Page 5 of 14

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
consequences that especially impacted the medical field workforce. Even
if a contingency plan had been created, it is conjecture to say that a
contingency plan would have had an impact on the Contractor’s staffing
and retention rates during and after COVID-19.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The Department is already in compliance with COMAR 21.05.03.04.F,
corrective action or which requires a Procurement Officer Determination (POD) to be
explain disagreement. prepared for the award recommendation for any Request For Proposals
(RFPs). These PODs provide a description of why the procurement is
necessary, explanation for why offers are rejected, and justification for
why the recommended awardee is the most advantageous to the State.
Going forward, the Department will document steps taken to address any
concerns identified during procurements, and the justification for
awarding contracts despite any concerns.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of If there are any issues or concerns, the Department will disclose them to
corrective action or the BPW.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of The DPSCS does not have the ability (i.e., staff, time, funds) to create
corrective action or contingency plans for every professional services contract. There are
explain disagreement. clauses built into the contract, such as the Termination for Default or
Termination for Convenience, that provide the State with a contingency
plan. Ensuring that contractors are held to the requirements of their
contracts is the most important action that DPSCS can take.
Auditor’s Comment: DPSCS’ response indicates that it was not aware that the
contractor had recently terminated contracts with other states until after the
contractor was selected for award. This information was explicitly indicated in
the contractor’s technical proposal. Thus, it is unclear why DPSCS would not
have been aware of this information.
While DPSCS asserts that the Procurement Officer’s Determinations it prepared
were sufficient justification for awarding the contracts, these documents did not
address the concerns noted in our analysis or any related considerations.
DPSCS indicated that Figure 3 should not be based on calendar year 2023 data
because this information was not available to DPSCS at the time of the
procurement. DPSCS did not provide us with any analysis of 2019 salary data
Page 6 of 14

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
during or subsequent to the audit that would contradict the conclusions reached in
our finding. In this regard, our analysis of other years during the contract periods
disclosed similar significant differences between the contractors’ hourly rates and
the statewide average. Consequently, we believe the presentation of calendar year
2023 data in the report, which represents the most current available data at the
time of our review, is appropriate to demonstrate the magnitude of this issue.
Finally, DPSCS’ response to recommendation 2c indicates that it did not have the
ability to create contingency plans for every professional services contract. This
recommendation clearly pertains to the medical and mental health contracts for
which DPSCS had collectively paid approximately $890 million as of June 30,
2024. Given these contractors’ consistent failure to meet the minimum
performance standards, we continue to believe that DPSCS should develop a
contingency plan to ensure that it is able to obtain all required services for
incarcerated individuals.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 3
DPSCS did not adequately monitor healthcare contractors to ensure critical
health examinations were completed within the required timeframes.
We recommend that DPSCS develop comprehensive procedures to ensure
that the contractors properly complete critical medical and mental health
examinations within the required timeframes, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide When the OLA came back to begin this audit, the DPSCS (as of
additional comments as 4/5/2022) was already performing periodic audits of medical intake
deemed necessary. exams, periodic physical exams, and mental health intake exams.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/15/2024
Please provide details of The DPSCS has developed comprehensive written audit procedures to
corrective action or ensure that the contractors properly complete critical medical and mental
explain disagreement. health examinations within the required timeframes.
Page 7 of 14

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
DPSCS did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that the medical
contractor properly and timely resolved medical related complaints filed by
incarcerated individuals.
We recommend that DPSCS establish procedures to ensure, at least on a test
basis, that incarcerated individuals’ complaints are properly investigated
and resolved timely.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2025
Please provide details of The DPSCS will establish written procedures to ensure, at least on a test
corrective action or basis, that incarcerated individuals’ complaints are properly investigated
explain disagreement. and resolved timely.
Finding 5
DPSCS did not verify that the staffing levels reported by the medical and
mental health contractors were accurate and did not follow up when errors
in the reported data were identified.
We recommend DPSCS verify the accuracy of contractor supplied staffing
reports and follow up when errors in the reported data are identified.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/28/2025
Please provide details of The DPSCS will verify the accuracy of contractor supplied staffing
corrective action or reports and follow up when errors in the reported data are identified.
explain disagreement.
Page 8 of 14

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
DPSCS did not have procedures to ensure amounts invoiced and paid for
pharmaceuticals reflected actual pharmaceuticals provided by the
contractor.
We recommend that DPSCS establish procedures to verify that
pharmaceuticals invoiced were received by the facilities, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of The DPSCS will establish written procedures to verify that
corrective action or pharmaceuticals invoiced were received by the facilities.
explain disagreement.
Page 9 of 14

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 7 related
to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article,
Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject
to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the
State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding,
including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with DPSCS’
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, DPSCS’ responses
indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 10 of 14

--- Page 43 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
Contract Settlement
Finding 8
DPSCS did not document the basis for a $20 million settlement agreement
with the medical contractor that also waived liquidated damages totaling at
least $40.5 million and significantly reduced the contract staffing
requirements. In addition, DPSCS did not obtain BPW approval for the
settlement as required.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. document the basis for executing contract settlements, including the cost
benefit of the settlement;
b. maintain documentation to support that contract modifications are
reasonable and in the best interest of the State; and
c. obtain approval from BPW prior to executing significant contract
modifications that change the scope of services.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DPSCS offers the following comments:
additional comments as
deemed necessary. By the Fall of 2022, all claims were being held in anticipation of
reaching a settlement, and the settlement demand was reduced to
approximately $40,000,000.
When evaluating the DPSCS liability for any of the claims, it was
determined that there was merit to the following claims:
1. Medicaid deductions being made in violation of contract
provisions;
2. COVID services were required from the contractor even after the
contractor was advised that the services would be provided by
the Maryland Department of Health (MDH);
3. Out-of-date and inaccurate information was provided in the RFP
and was not updated even where more current information was
available;
4. The prior contractor’s failure to perform adequately towards the
end of its contract left conditions worse than the selected
contractor anticipated; and
Page 11 of 14

--- Page 44 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
5. The prior contractor deferred certain services to the new
contractor when it realized it would not be awarded the new
contract.
The DPSCS also determined that a retroactive waiver of liquidated
damages for staffing shortages was reasonable and necessary given the
hiring issues all medical providers were facing during the COVID-19
state of emergency.
In November 2022, during settlement negotiations, a fiscal analysis was
completed to assess whether there were sufficient funds remaining in the
contract to pay for a potential settlement. It was determined that, given
the not-to-exceed amount approved by the BPW and the actual spending
against the contract, there were likely sufficient funds remaining in the
contract to discuss settlement without needing a contract modification. A
judgment was made that the contractor would likely succeed on most, if
not all, of its contract claims, so a decision was made that it was in the
best interest of the State to attempt to settle the claims. As a result, there
were negotiations with the contractor and a settlement amount of
$20,000,000 was agreed upon.
This settlement was considered a matter of contract administration that
did not encumber funds beyond that which had already been approved
by the BPW. This action was not the result of any action filed in court
and was consistent with the way settlement of contract disputes in the
past had been resolved.
In regards to this situation specifically, these events occurred during the
COVID-19 pandemic. This time period was a unique, once in a lifetime
event that required unique and once in a lifetime responses and review.
Accommodations were made for the vendor as healthcare was a
particularly challenging field during the pandemic, and this will likely
not happen again in the future.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The DPSCS will ensure documentation for the basis of executing
corrective action or contract settlements including the cost benefit of the settlement.
explain disagreement.
It should be noted that many discussions and negotiations of these types
of complicated legal settlements are often done on the phone, and only
the final negotiated decision becomes part of any agreement between the
parties.
Page 12 of 14

--- Page 45 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of It is already the DPSCS practice to maintain documentation to support
corrective action or the fact that modifications are reasonable and in the best interest of the
explain disagreement. State. The DPSCS keeps emails and documentation, along with
Procurement Officer Determinations, that provide this support.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The DPSCS will ensure that substantial modifications to the scope of
corrective action or services will get the BPW review and any approval. We are working on
explain disagreement. ensuring that both Procurement Officers and Contract Managers attend
to the details of the contract and maintain that all work is in compliance
with the original scope of the contract.
Auditor’s Comment: Although DPSCS agreed with the recommendations, it
provided significant comments regarding our analysis. We reviewed these
comments and concluded that they did not dispute the facts presented in our
analysis. Accordingly, we continue to believe our finding is accurate as
presented.
Liquidated Damages
Finding 9
DPSCS did not assess liquidated damages on the mental health contract as
provided for in the contract, and damages assessed on the medical contract
were significantly lower than provided for in the related contract.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. assess liquidated damages in accordance with the contracts, and
b. consult with its legal counsel and determine the feasibility of assessing
additional liquidated damages for instances in which the original amount
was not calculated in accordance with the contract or was based on
inaccurate staffing reports.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DPSCS offers the following comments:
additional comments as
deemed necessary. The COVID-19 pandemic was a unique, once in a lifetime event that
required unique and once in a lifetime responses and review. It was
Page 13 of 14

--- Page 46 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts
Agency Response Form
determined that it was not in the State’s best interests to assess liquidated
damages during COVID-19, as staffing sufficient medical personnel in
our facilities was virtually impossible. The previous healthcare contracts
did have LDs that were assessed prior to and after COVID-19.
The time period where LDs were not collected was done after contract
claims were filed, and settlements nullified LD’s, so the decision to not
collect LDs was still in accordance with settlement decisions related to
the medical and mental health contracts.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The DPSCS has and will assess liquidated damages (LDs) in accordance
corrective action or with the contracts when deemed appropriate.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/6/2025
Please provide details of The DPSCS included LD calculations that have been developed with
corrective action or necessary requirements to fulfill the new contracts. The feasibility of
explain disagreement. assessing additional retroactive LD’s for instances in which the previous
contract’s original amounts were not calculated in accordance with the
contract, or was based on inaccurate staffing, is a legal question which
will need to be reviewed by legal counsel.
Page 14 of 14

--- Page 47 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Thea A. Chimento, CFE
Jillian A. Novak, CPA
Staff Auditors