Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts, Central Operations, Maryland Correctional Enterprises


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts (11/25/2024)

Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Central Operations (9/17/2024)

Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Maryland Correctional Enterprises (6/20/2024)

Video Presentation (Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts, Central Operations, Maryland Correctional Enterprises starts at 11:03)
Date: 12/10/2024
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67589ce28130bfd19fe74cc8
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:12:30.872914
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Incarcerated Individual Healthcare Contracts (November 25, 2024)
Central Operations (September 17, 2024)
Maryland Correctional Enterprises (June 20, 2024)
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Robert J. Smith, CPA
December 10, 2024

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Summary of Recent DPSCS Audits
Number of
Report Report Date Findings Repeat Findings
Incarcerated Individual
November 25, 2024 9 0
Healthcare Contracts
DPSCS – Central
September 17, 2024 4 3
Operations
Maryland Correctional
June 20, 2024 1 0
Enterprises (MCE)
DPSCS – Regional
July 20, 2023 5 2
Operations
This presentation focuses on the Healthcare Contracts report and
select findings from the Central Operations and MCE reports.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report - Overview
 DPSCS uses third-party contractors to provide healthcare services to
its incarcerated population. OLA audits dating back to February
2007 have identified issues with these contracts.
 This report focused on the procurement and monitoring of the
medical, mental health, and pharmaceutical contracts.
DPSCS Healthcare Contracts Reviewed
($ in millions)
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report - Key Findings
 DPSCS did not properly structure the medical and mental health
contracts.
 DPSCS awarded the medical and mental health contracts despite
concerns with the contractors and did not disclose the concerns to
BPW or develop a contingency plan.
 DPSCS did not monitor the contracts to ensure
 critical health exams were conducted
 required staffing was provided
 all pharmaceuticals paid for were received
 DPSCS could not document the basis for a contract settlement
and did not assess liquidated damages in accordance with the
contracts.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report Finding 1 - Procurements
Structure of the Medical and Mental Health Contracts
 DPSCS could not justify the use of a fixed fee payment structure.
 DPSCS could not support that the staffing levels were sufficient to
provide all required services.
 DPSCS did not establish adequate hourly rates to ensure the
contractors could recruit and retain enough staff.
 DPSCS did not require the contractors to obtain performance
bonds.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report Finding 2 - Procurements
DPSCS Concerns with Medical and Mental Health Contractors
 Prior to the contract awards, DPSCS expressed concerns with the
contractors’ ability to recruit and retain the required level of staff.
 DPSCS could not document that it disclosed these concerns to the
Board of Public Works (BPW).
 DPSCS did not establish a contingency plan in case the contractors
were unable to meet contract requirements.
 Rates paid by the contractors for key positions were significantly
below the statewide average. For example, in calendar year 2023, a
registered nurse employed by the medical contractor would have
been paid $25,500 less than the statewide average.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report Finding 3 - Monitoring
DPSCS Monitoring of Critical Health Examinations
Contractor Exam Type Exam Must be Conducted Within
Medical Intake Screening 2 hours of arrival at a DPSCS facility
Medical Physical Exam 7 days of admission to a DPSCS facility
Mental Health Suicide Risk 24 hours of admission to a DPSCS facility or 72 hours of
Evaluation placement in special confinement
Mental Health Mental Health Exam 7 days of admission to a DPSCS facility
 DPSCS did not adequately ensure the medical contractor completed intake
screenings, properly performed physical exams, or ensured missing or
incomplete screenings and exams were completed.
 DPSCS did not follow up with the mental health contractor to ensure that
missing screenings and incomplete physical exams were completed. Between
July and September 2023, the mental health contractor did not complete 548
required Suicide Risk Evaluations and 682 required Mental Health Exams.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report Finding 4 - Monitoring
DPSCS Monitoring of Medical Related Complaints
 State regulations require complaints to be investigated and
resolved within 45 days of the date filed.
 Our test of 18 complaints filed between May and October 2023
disclosed DPSCS could not document that 17 complaints were
investigated in accordance with State regulations.
 DPSCS also could not document that it followed up with the
contractor to address the untimely resolution of 10 of the 18
complaints that were resolved between 1 to 6 months late.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report Finding 5 - Monitoring
DPSCS Monitoring of Staffing Levels
 The contractors provided monthly staffing reports which DPSCS
used to determine their compliance with the contract staffing
requirements and any liquidated damages.
 DPSCS did not attempt to verify the reported staffing on the
medical contract.
 DPSCS only attempted to verify the staffing for the mental health
contract once and did not resolve discrepancies it identified. For
example, DPSCS noted instances in which the employees and
hours worked on the monthly staffing report did not agree to the
contractor’s timekeeping system.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report Finding 6 - Monitoring
DPSCS Monitoring of Pharmaceutical Contractor Invoices
 According to DPSCS records, payments to the pharmaceutical
contractor totaled $161.5 million as of June 30, 2024.
 Our test of 10 payments totaling $7.6 million made between
October and December 2023 disclosed that DPSCS could not
readily verify that these 10 payments corresponded to
pharmaceuticals provided by the contractor.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report Finding 8 - Contract Settlement
Support for Medical Contactor Contract Settlement
 DPSCS could not document the basis for a $20 million settlement
with the medical contractor and its decision to waive $40.5 million
in liquidated damages.
 DPSCS could not support its decision to reduce the contract
staffing levels by 132 positions (15 percent) and did not obtain
BPW approval for the change.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Healthcare Contracts Report Finding 9 - Liquidated Damages
Liquidated Damages for Failing to Provide Required Staffing
 The mental health and medical contractors failed to provide all the
required staff in any month of their respective contracts.
 DPSCS did not assess the mental health contractor liquidated
damages totaling approximately $10.5 million between March
2022 and January 2024.
 DPSCS assessed the medical contractor liquidated damages
based on the statewide staffing levels instead of on a per-position
basis as specified in the contract which resulted in reduced
damages. For example, DPSCS failed to assess liquidated
damages totaling $809,000 between October and December
2023.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Select Findings from Other DPSCS Reports
DPSCS – Central Operations Report
 DPSCS did not ensure employees were removed from payroll
timely and adjustments to payroll and leave were proper.
 DPSCS procurements circumvented certain approvals, limited its
leverage as a high-volume purchaser, and were not published.
DPSCS - Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE) Report
 MCE did not adequately pursue the collection of delinquent
accounts receivables.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Central Operations Report Findings 1 & 2 - Payroll
 Finding 1 - DPSCS did not ensure employees were removed from
the payroll timely. We identified 154 employees that were on the
payroll from 10 to 860 days after their separation date. Our test
of payments to 7 of these employees disclosed $173,000 in
improper payments.
 Finding 2 - DPSCS did not review manual payroll adjustments prior
to submission to DBM, and did not have any independent review
of leave adjustments. DPSCS also did not use available system
output reports of these adjustments to ensure that only authorized
adjustments had been processed. Our review of certain payroll
adjustments disclosed that DPSCS overpaid 4 employees and
lacked required support for 3 others. Repeat Finding
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Central Operations Report Findings 3 & 4 - Procurement
 Finding 3 - DPSCS issued 1,051 purchase orders totaling
approximately $4.3 million to 9 vendors without a formal
competitive procurement process. Our review disclosed that
certain of these purchases appeared to be artificially split. As a
result, DPSCS did not maximize its leverage as a high-volume
purchaser and circumvented enhanced oversight, controls, and
transparency required of higher cost contracts. Repeat Finding
 Finding 4 – Our test of 10 contracts totaling $249 million
disclosed that for 9 contracts totaling $248.2 million, DPSCS did
not publish the awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as
required. Repeat Finding
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MCE Report Finding 1 - Accounts Receivable
MCE did not adequately pursue delinquent accounts receivable.
 MCE did not always issue dunning Accounts Receivables
Delinquent Over 90 Days
notices to State agencies or address
as of June 30, 2023
delinquent State accounts with senior
leadership. MCE also continued to
provide goods and services despite
the longstanding delinquent accounts.
 MCE had not referred any delinquent
accounts from non-State customers to
the State’s Central Collections Unit
since August 2018.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 16

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
Our audits of DPSCS identified numerous weaknesses in the
procurement and monitoring of its incarcerated individual
healthcare contracts, as well as inadequate pursuit of delinquent
accounts receivable.
We made detailed recommendations to DPSCS and we will assess
the status of the recommendations during the course of our next
audits.
We are happy to answer any questions.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services Page 17