Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Special Investigation Unit Update and Results


Video Presentation (Special Investigation Unit Update and Results starts at 3:41:44)
Date: 12/10/2024
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67589ce38130bfd19fe74ccb
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:12:40.319241
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Investigation Unit
Update and Results
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA , CFE
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
December 10, 2024

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Investigation Unit - History
 2002 – The Joint Audit Committee instructed OLA to implement a hotline and
web referral process for the reporting of allegations of fraud, waste, and
abuse in State government operations.
 2003 – OLA’s hotline and web referral process were launched with an
expected call volume of 200 calls per year but as noted on page 6, actual call
volume has consistently exceeded expectations.
 2016 – OLA dedicates a second employee to the hotline.
 2020 – OLA establishes the Fraud Investigation Unit.
 2024 – OLA changes the name to the Special Investigation Unit (SIU).
Special Investigation Unit
Page 2
Update and Results

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Investigation Unit (SIU) – Responsibilities
SIU operations include both administrative and investigative activities as
depicted in the following tables.
Administrative Operations Investigative Operations
Fraud Hotline Administration Audit Support
• Call Intake • Allegation Approach Development
• Initial Research, Assessment, & Recommended Actions • Procedural & Testing Guidance
• Allegation Referrals • Finding Development
• Vendor & Employee Research
• Transaction Analyses
Allegation Due Diligence
• Specialized Reports
• Research
• Validity & Risk Assessment
Special Investigations
• Recommended Actions
• Approach Development • Planning & Conducting Investigations
• Referrals to Prosecutorial Agencies
Outreach & Education
Fraud Brainstorming & Risk Assessment
• Agency Outreach
• Training & Development • Brainstorming
• Presentations • Allegation Risk Assessment
• Assessment of High-Risk Areas
Special Investigation Unit
Page 3
Update and Results

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Administration
 Allegations are received by phone, web, referral, mail, and from OLA
auditors in the field.
 Callers are informed that the information provided is considered
confidential and are provided with information about the State’s
“whistleblower” laws if reassurance is needed.
 Investigative auditors (certified fraud examiners) handle calls during
business hours in accordance with established procedures.
 All allegations are assessed for credibility, and due diligence is performed
before field investigations are initiated.
 Allegations are 1) investigated by OLA – either as part of a regularly
scheduled audit or as a special audit, 2) referred to applicable State
agencies, or 3) not pursued.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 4
Update and Results

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Administrative Operations - Referrals to State Agencies
Callers who report allegations that would be more appropriately handled by
other agencies are referred to the applicable agencies for assistance.
Examples of these referrals include:
 Unemployment Insurance – Maryland Department of Labor
 Welfare Benefits – Department of Human Services, Office of the Inspector
General
 Medicaid Benefits – Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Health
 Identify Theft – Office of the Attorney General, Identify Theft Unit
 Income Tax – Comptroller of Maryland, Compliance Division
Special Investigation Unit
Page 5
Update and Results

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Statistics
Call Volume Allegation Disposition
(Calendar Year Basis) (February 2003 through October 2021)
1800
1679
1600
1433
1400 1321 1291 Investigations Completed by
13%
OLA or in Process
1200
1000 Referred to State Agencies
68%
800 (31% were related to Department
of Human Services benefits.)
600
420
400
Not Pursued 19%
200
0
Average 2021 2022 2023 2024
2003 to 2020 Actual Actual Actual Projected
Special Investigation Unit
Page 6
Update and Results

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Awareness
The SIU promotes OLA’s hotline by displaying
fraud posters in State offices, posting
information on LinkedIn, distributing
information to vendors on eMaryland
Marketplace, and sending periodic emails
about OLA’s hotline to State employees.
Chapter 225 of the Acts of 2021 required
that each unit of State government:
• Display OLA’s fraud hotline posters in their
buildings,
• Post a link to OLA’s fraud hotline website
on their websites, and
• At the request of OLA, distribute
information regarding fraud to their
employees.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 7
Update and Results

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
The results of investigations may be included in OLA’s fiscal compliance audit
reports or in separate special review reports. Examples from the past 12
months include:
 Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR) – Review of corporate
purchasing card activity identified questionable transactions on cards
assigned to individuals no longer employed at MCCR. (Report Dated October
30, 2024)
 Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Allegations related to
inadequate support for labor charges billed under the networkMaryland
contract. (Report Dated March 29, 2024)
 Maryland Department of Transportation – Maryland Aviation Administration
(MAA) – Allegations related to concerns with MAA’s procurement and
subsequent modification of a convenience stores contract. (Report Dated
March 6, 2024)
Special Investigation Unit
Page 8
Update and Results

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Investigative Operations – Audit Support
The SIU provided support on approximately 75 other OLA audits. This support
included activities such as:
 Participation in fraud brainstorming sessions to identify high-risk areas and
develop an approach to address the risks.
 The development of audit procedures to address allegations and related risks.
 Preparation of electronic data matches to identify high-risk transactions.
 Analyses of agency transactions and documents to identify indicators of fraud
and noncompliance with laws and regulations.
 Comprehensive research into individuals and companies referenced in
allegations.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 9
Update and Results

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
The SIU’s efforts will continue to evolve and expand to help prevent and detect
fraud and abuse in State government.
 Significant efforts continue to be made to build awareness of the hotline.
 Hotline activity has continued to exceed initial expectations. Investigative
auditors provide a high level of customer service to the hundreds of hotline
callers.
 OLA continues to identify and report on significant findings, in both fiscal
compliance audit reports and special review reports, based on hotline
allegations.
 SIU future plans include:
 Processes for the proactive detection of fraudulent transactions
 Expanded support for ongoing audit efforts
 Additional initiatives to promote fraud awareness in State government
Special Investigation Unit
Page 10
Update and Results