Title: Department of Veterans and Military Families


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2024, the Department of Veterans Affairs is now named Department of Veterans and Military Families.
Date: 01/16/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=678a73f0e7442bf8e8c5ab2e
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:13:57.689084
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Veterans and Military Families
January 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 16, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Veterans and
Military Families (DVMF) for the period beginning April 3, 2020 and ending
November 30, 2023. DVMF assists veterans and their families and survivors in
obtaining federal, State, and local benefits provided by law in recognition of their
service to the State and country. DVMF also manages five veterans’ cemeteries,
maintains four veterans’ war memorials, and operates and manages the Charlotte
Hall Veterans Home (CHVH).
Our audit disclosed that DVMF did not have procedures to ensure that all federal
funds were received. According to DVMF records as of March 2024, DVMF had
not received federal fund reimbursements totaling $400,438 related to 484
interments, that occurred between 3 months to more than 4 years prior to our
review.
In addition, DVMF did not verify the accuracy of invoice charges from the
CHVH management services contractor. We noted that DVMF did not obtain
supporting documentation to verify reimbursable expenses and management fees
billed by the contractor. Between July and December 2023, DVMF paid the
current CHVH contractor $21.3 million in reimbursable expenses and
management fees.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of one of the two
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that DVMF
satisfactorily addressed this finding. We did not follow up on the other finding
due to pending litigation.

--- Page 4 ---
DVMF’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DVMF and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 11, Laws of Maryland 2024, effective July 1, 2024, renamed the
Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs the Department of Veterans and
Military Families (DVMF). DVMF delivers services and administers programs to
assist veterans, their families, and survivors in obtaining federal, State, and local
benefits provided by law in recognition of their service to the State and country.
DVMF provides administrative services through numerous veterans’ service
centers throughout the State, the United States Department of Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, and the Charlotte Hall Veterans Home (CHVH). CHVH
provides care for Maryland veterans who are unable to care for themselves due to
disability or advancing age, or who have the need for skilled nursing care. DVMF
also operates and maintains five veterans’ cemeteries, four veterans’ war
memorials, and offices in Annapolis and Baltimore. According to the State’s
records, DVMF’s expenditures for fiscal year 2023 totaled approximately $41.4
million (see Figure 1 on the following page).
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
DVMF Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 106 92.2%
Vacant 9 7.8%
Total 115
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $9,438,718 22.8%
Technical and Special Fees 421,057 1.0%
Operating Expenses 31,586,315 76.2%
Total $41,446,090
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $18,443,355 44.5%
Special Fund 4,621,994 11.2%
Federal Fund 18,380,741 44.3%
Total $41,446,090
Source: State financial and personnel records
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home Management Services Contractor
In June 2023, DVMF terminated its contract with its Charlotte Hall Veterans
Home (CHVH) management service contractor responsible for staffing and
operating the veterans home. The contract was terminated following reports of
abuse and neglect at the facility that seriously jeopardized the life, health, and
safety of its residents. DVMF, with assistance from the Department of General
Services - Office of State Procurement, conducted an emergency procurement for
a new contractor and awarded a five-year $198 million contract to a new
contractor taking over operations of the CHVH in June 2023. According to
DVMF, as of November 2024 the results of litigation between the State and the
former CHVH contractor were still outstanding.
4

--- Page 7 ---
New Veterans Home and Cemetery Expansion/Renovation
The State is in the planning phase of a procurement to build a new veterans home
with an estimated completion date of February 2027. The new home will be a
128-bed skilled nursing facility in Sykesville, Maryland and provide additional
bed space for Maryland’s aging veteran population at a more centrally located
facility. As of July 2023, the project’s estimated cost is $198.8 million of which
up to 65 percent is eligible for federal funding.
The State is also expanding burial plots at the Garrison Forest Cemetery and is
estimated to complete this work in January 2027. The expansion project will add
6,500 burial crypts and 3,500 columbarium wall niches1 adding a minimum of 10
years of capacity to the cemetery. The project also includes site improvements
such as roadway and employee parking expansions, as well as enhancements to
improve existing irrigation systems. As of July 2023, the project’s estimated cost
is $12.7 million of which $11.5 million is eligible for federal funding.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of one of the two findings in
our preceding audit report dated January 5, 2021. As shown in Figure 2 below,
we determined that DVMF addressed this finding. We did not follow up on the
remaining finding due to the aforementioned pending litigation between the State
and the former CHVH contractor.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) did not
Finding 1 adequately control and account for collections and Not repeated
certain accounts receivable.
DVA did not invoke a contract provision that would
have enabled it to reduce payments to the vendor
Not repeated
Finding 2 operating CHVH when required staffing was not
(Not followed up on)
provided, and did not document its rationale for not
taking that action.
1 A columbarium is a structure with niches designed to hold urns with the ashes of the deceased.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Federal Funds
Finding 1
The Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) did not have
procedures to ensure that all federal funds were received.
Analysis
DVMF did not have procedures to ensure that all federal funds were received.
DVMF requests federal reimbursement from the United States Veterans
Administration (USVA) on an as needed basis for burial costs. According to
State financial records, during fiscal year 2023, DVMF was reimbursed $1.8
million for veteran burial costs.
DVMF did not have documentation that reimbursements for certain burial plot
costs were received and did not pursue recovery of other reimbursements.
According to DVMF records as of March 2024, DVMF had not received federal
fund reimbursements totaling $400,438 related to 484 interments, that occurred
between 3 months to more than 4 years prior to our review.
At our request, DVMF contacted the USVA to determine the status of the
reimbursement requests. The USVA reported to DVMF that it had reimbursed 89
of these interments totaling $75,167 but DVMF had no record that the
reimbursements were received. In addition, DVMF had not investigated the
payment records provided by the USVA or pursued recovery of the remaining
unpaid reimbursements.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DVMF establish and implement procedures for federal
reimbursements. These procedures should include
a. investigating the USVA payment records to identify any payments that
were previously received for burial plot costs, and
b. following up when burial plot costs are not received and pursue recovery
of any unpaid interments.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home
Finding 2
DVMF did not verify the accuracy of invoice charges from the current
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home (CHVH) management services contractor.
Analysis
DVMF did not verify the accuracy of the invoices from the current CHVH
management services contractor. The invoices contained charges for
reimbursable expenses, such as, the contractor’s payroll and supplies, and for
management fees based on the number of occupied beds. Our review disclosed
that, although allowed by the contract, DVMF did not obtain supporting
documentation, such as timesheets and receipts to verify the reimbursable
expenses. Furthermore, DVMF did not use available reports of occupied beds
(census reports) to verify the management fees.
The current CHVH management services contractor began providing services in
July 2023. Between July and December 2023, DVMF paid the CHVH contractor
$19.7 million in reimbursable expenses and $1.6 million in management fees.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DVMF verify the accuracy of the management services
contractor’s invoices by obtaining and reviewing the supporting
documentation.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Veterans and
Military Families (DVMF) for the period beginning April 3, 2020 and ending
November 30, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DVMF’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, cash receipts,
federal fund reimbursements, payroll, the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund, and
equipment. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of DVMF’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including the DVMF.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 3, 2020 and ending November 30, 2023, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the DVMF’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
8

--- Page 11 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from DVMF’s system used to record and inventory
equipment. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data was sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data was used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DVMF’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the DVMF, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
9

--- Page 12 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DVMF’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DVMF that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
DVMF’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DVMF regarding the
results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
APPENDIX
WES MOORE
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF Governor
VETERANS & MILITARY FAMILIES ARUNA MILLER
Lt. Governor
ANTHONY WOODS
Office of the Secretary
Secretary
January 14, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE, Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Mr. Tanen:
Upon authorization by Secretary Anthony Woods, I am submitting herewith DVMF’s responses
to the recommendations made in your draft legislative audit report received from OLA on
January 7, 2025.
Sincerely,
Alayna Charland
Director of Finance and Administration
THE WINELAND BUILDING, FOURTH FLOOR
16 FRANCIS STREET, ANNAPOLIS, MARYLAND 21401
TOLL FREE: 866-793-1577 ∙ ANNAPOLIS: 410-260-3838 ∙ FAX: 410-216-7928
veterans.maryland.gov
TTY USERS CALL VIA MD RELAY

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Veterans and Military Families
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 1
The Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) did not have
procedures to ensure that all federal funds were received.
We recommend that DVMF establish and implement procedures for federal
reimbursements. These procedures should include
a. investigating the USVA payment records to identify any payments that
were previously received for burial plot costs, and
b. following up when burial plot costs are not received and pursue recovery
of any unpaid interments.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DVMF does not dispute the finding and will implement the audit
additional comments as recommendations. We do believe additional context is warranted. In or
deemed necessary. around 2019, the USVA implemented, with very few supporting
procedures, a massive change in the plot allowance claims process.
Rather than filing a single consolidated claim for all eligible interments
each month, DVMF now was required to file a single separate claim for
each interment individually. Rather than payments being generated from
the Baltimore Regional Office as lump sum payments, the VA began
remitting payments of whatever individual claims they had approved,
sometimes paying for a single plot allowance, often consolidating a
handful.
The payments do not now indicate for which veteran the payment is
made; that information is mailed separately, sometimes
contemporaneously, occasionally as much as several months following
the payment. Tracking and reconciling is an arduous, granular manual
process requiring hours of effort on an ongoing basis.
Nonetheless, we concur with the finding and will continue to refine our
process.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2025
Please provide details of DVMF will develop and implement procedures by 3/31/2025 to
corrective action or identify any payments that were previously received for burial plot
explain disagreement. costs. The output from the procedures will take additional time
given the volume and difficulty of the task.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2025
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Veterans and Military Families
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DVMF will develop and implement procedures by 3/31/2025 to
corrective action or follow up when burial plot costs are not received and pursue
explain disagreement. recovery of any unpaid interments.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Veterans and Military Families
Agency Response Form
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home
Finding 2
DVMF did not verify the accuracy of invoice charges from the current
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home (CHVH) management services contractor.
We recommend that DVMF verify the accuracy of the management services
contractor’s invoices by obtaining and reviewing the supporting
documentation.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide In 2023, as the result of an emergency procurement action, DVMF
additional comments as entered into a cost reimbursement contract with its current management
deemed necessary. contractor at Charlotte Hall Veterans Home, a 5-year contract worth
almost $200 million. The Department, to our knowledge, has never been
party to such a contract in the past.
Cost reimbursement contracts pose a higher risk to the awarding agency
and a lower risk to the contractor than other types of contracts, since
compensation is not based primarily on completion of fixed-cost
deliverables but consists instead of reimbursement of all eligible costs
incurred by the contractor in the process of delivery. Cost
reimbursement contracts require much greater detail oversight by the
awarding agency than other types of contracts. DVMF had no prior
experience with cost reimbursement contracts, and the process of fiscal
oversight has been an evolution, as DVMF has had to develop, in real
time, new review processes in the context of a very complex operation,
where the primary focus had to be on the care and wellbeing of the
veterans living at the Home. The Department has indeed implemented
processes and continues to develop and expand them. In addition, the
Department is procuring out-service training for managing cost
reimbursement contracts to its staff.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2025
Please provide details of Verification of direct-billed contractor payroll and benefits costs is
corrective action or the most significant action the Department can take to comply with
explain disagreement. the recommendation. DVMF is working with the contractor now on
that effort and intends to have a process in place on or before
3/31/2025 for payroll verification. Internal monthly review of other
costs is already underway and will continue to develop. The
Department intends to provide out-service training in cost
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Veterans and Military Families
Agency Response Form
reimbursement contract administration to staff in the first week of
February 2025, which will result in the ability to further improve
financial review processes.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 18 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
John B. Wachter, CFE
Senior Auditor
Kevin M. Billard
Staff Auditor