Title: Board of License Commissioners for Prince George's County
Date: 01/28/2025
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=679ce05b3e7bc79aab6cfeae
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:14:17.810615
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
January 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 28, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the management practices of the Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County (BOLC) as required by the State Government Article,
Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. As of January 24, 2024,
there were 637 active alcoholic beverage licenses that had been issued by BOLC,
including 34 new licenses issued during calendar year 2023, and fiscal year 2023
revenues totaled $2.4 million, primarily derived from license fees.
The law requires our audit to focus on BOLC operations relating to licensing,
inspections, disciplinary procedures, and management oversight, which broadly
represent the four audit objectives established. BOLC had findings in two of the
four areas reviewed.
Licensing
BOLC did not always timely deposit license related collections.
Management Oversight
Our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices
before the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is
defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and

--- Page 4 ---
using our professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding
falls under the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity
finding were previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
This is our third audit of the BOLC, and we have noticed continual improvement
in BOLC audit results, with the number of report findings decreasing from 17 in
our first report to 2 in this report. Our audit included a review to determine the
status of the six findings contained in our proceeding audit report of BOLC. For
the non-cybersecurity-related findings we determined that BOLC satisfactorily
addressed those findings.
Our overall audit scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on pages 5
and 6. BOLC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of BOLC’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding. In addition, we reviewed the response
to our findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the
corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Board and the staff of the BOLC. We also wish to acknowledge the Board’s
continued willingness to address the audit issues and to implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 5
Audit Scope 5
Objectives and Methodology 6
Fieldwork and Agency Response 7
Background Information 8
Agency Responsibilities 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 10
Objective 1 – Licensing
Objective and Methodology 10
Background 10
New and Transfer Licenses 13
License Renewals 14
Conclusion 14
Finding 1 – The Board of License Commissioners (BOLC) did not always 14
timely deposit collections.
Objective 2 – Inspections
Objective and Methodology 15
Background 15
Conclusion 17
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology 18
Background 18
Conclusion 19
3

--- Page 6 ---
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology 20
Conclusion 20
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 20
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
The State Government Article, Section 2-1220(g) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires the Office of Legislative Audits, at least once every six years,1
to conduct a performance audit of the Board of License Commissioners for Prince
George's County (BOLC) to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the
management practices of BOLC and the economy with which BOLC uses
resources. The law also states the audit shall focus on operations relating to
licensing, inspections, disciplinary procedures, and management oversight.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained for our findings and conclusions met those standards.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of this cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to BOLC and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
1 Chapter 661, 2024 Laws of Maryland, effective October 1, 2024, changed the performance audit
frequency from once every 3 years to once every 6 years for BOLC.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. Evaluate the adequacy of procedures for alcoholic beverage licensing and the
maintenance of related records and determine if the licensing process
complied with State law and Board requirements.
2. Evaluate the adequacy of BOLC policies and procedures for conducting
inspections of alcoholic beverage licensees and maintaining related records
and to determine whether inspections were performed in accordance with
governing laws, policies, and procedures.
3. Evaluate the disciplinary process and determine if BOLC complied with
applicable State law, enforced applicable Board rules and regulations
governing licensees, and maintained accurate disciplinary records.
4. Evaluate management processes to determine if proper oversight exists over
BOLC operations.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies
and procedures established by the Board and BOLC administrative personnel
governing the licensing process and related records. We also reviewed pertinent
sections of BOLC’s Standard Operating Procedures that govern BOLC
administrative functions; the Rules and Regulations of the Board of License
Commissioners for Prince George's County, which governs the conduct of
licensee business operations; and applicable Prince George's County policies.
Additionally, we interviewed BOLC staff to determine the processes used to issue
licenses, conduct inspections, administer disciplinary proceedings, and maintain
related records. We also observed the licensing and disciplinary hearing
processes.
We obtained data files of current BOLC licensees as of January 2024, that
included data such as renewals and transfers for license year 2023,2 and violation
data from the BOLC licensing database; this database is stored on servers
maintained by the Prince George’s County Office of Information Technology.
We also obtained data files of inspections performed during license years 2022 to
2024 (through January 2024) from a separate inspection database maintained by
the Prince George’s County Office of Information Technology. We used these
data files to perform various tests of the relevant data and determined that these
data files were sufficiently reliable for the purposes they were used during the
audit.
2 Depending on the type of license, the license year begins in April, May or June.
6

--- Page 9 ---
We also reviewed the scanned licensee paper files and the minutes of Board
hearings that evidenced the decisions and actions taken by the Board. Finally, we
obtained records of complaints received by BOLC, as well as complaints
registered through the Prince George's County 311 Community Relations Service
Request System (311 System),3 to evaluate the BOLC process for complaint-
initiated inspections.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, and unless specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select
the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be
projected to the entire population from which the test items were selected.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed. In addition to the conditions included in this report,
other findings were communicated to BOLC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from January 2024 to June 2024. BOLC’s response
to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this audit
report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise BOLC regarding the results of our review of its
response.
3 Prince George’s County transitioned to a new 311 System in February 2022.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County (BOLC) is an
agency of the County. BOLC operations are governed by Title 26 of the
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
for alcoholic beverage licensing and enforcement. BOLC is responsible for
processing applications for and renewals of licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor;
conducting periodic inspections of businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages;
collecting all license fees and fines; and fining, suspending, or revoking the
licenses of violators of alcoholic beverage laws. BOLC also issues licenses for
special venues (such as a casino, convention center, or stadium) and for special
events (such as one-day licenses for beer and wine festivals).
BOLC revenues from licenses issued, fines, and late fees are paid to Prince
George’s County, and all BOLC expenditures, including employee salaries, are
paid by the County. Furthermore, BOLC is included in the County’s annual
budget and its financial activity is included in the County’s Annual
Comprehensive Financial Report. According to Prince George’s County records,
BOLC’s fiscal year 2023 revenues totaled approximately $2.4 million, and
expenditures totaled approximately $1.9 million. In accordance with State law,
BOLC revenues in excess of its expenditures and salaries are to be used by the
County Executive and County Council for the general purposes of the County.
BOLC is governed by a board consisting of 5 members appointed by the County
Executive of Prince George’s County, subject to confirmation by the Maryland
Senate. As of February 2024, BOLC had 21 regular employees– which included
2 executive staff, 3 supervising inspectors, 4 support staff – as well as 12 part-
time inspectors.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 8, 2022. As disclosed in Figure 1,
for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that BOLC
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
BOLC did not ensure that all documents required by State law
Finding 1 or BOLC policy were obtained prior to the issuance of Not repeated
licenses and permits.
BOLC did not always have adequate documentation of
criminal background checks of license applicants and could
Finding 2 Not repeated
not support that it verified applicants did not have taxes due to
the State or Prince George’s County prior to issuing licenses.
BOLC had not established adequate record keeping
Finding 3 procedures and internal controls over license fees and other Not repeated
office collections.
Inspection reports were not always properly completed or
Finding 4 Not repeated
subject to an independent documented supervisory review.
BOLC did not maintain adequate records, did not adequately
review the assessment and collection process, and did not
Finding 5 Not repeated
always assess late fees or take other required action on
delinquent accounts.
BOLC did not adequately monitor user access to the License
Manager System, the County’s 311 System, and to critical
Finding 6 Status Redacted4
data files on BOLC’s network resulting in employees with
improper or unnecessary access.
4 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 – Licensing
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the licensing process was to evaluate the adequacy of Board of
License Commissioners for Prince George’s County (BOLC) procedures for
alcoholic beverage licensing and the maintenance of related records, and to
determine, based on this evaluation and transaction testing, if the licensing
process complied with State law and Board requirements. To accomplish our
objective, we reviewed applicable State laws, BOLC’s Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs) and the Rules and Regulations for the Board of License
Commissioners for Prince George’s County.
Additionally, we interviewed BOLC staff to determine the processes used to
collect fees; issue, renew, and transfer licenses; and maintain related records. We
obtained a data file of the current licenses as of January 2024 from the BOLC’s
License Manager System (LMS), which is maintained by Prince George’s County
Office of Information Technology. We used this license file to perform various
tests of the licensing process including issuance of new licenses and permits,
license renewals, license transfers, and collection of related cash receipts. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Background
BOLC processes applications for new licenses, license renewals and
modifications, and transfers of existing licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor in
Prince George’s County. There are four different classes of alcoholic beverage
licenses, and each are valid for a one-year period ending April 30 (Class A), May
31st (Class B), or June 30th (Class C and D).
 Class A licenses are issued to liquor stores.
 Class B licenses are issued to restaurants, and other special venues as
described in law, including arenas, hotels/motels, casinos, and stadiums.
 Class C licenses are issued to non-profit private clubs.
 Class D licenses are issued to taverns.
BOLC also issues permits for special events (such as beer and wine festivals) and
when providing entertainment (such as music or dancing). According to BOLC
records, there were 637 active alcoholic beverage licenses as of January 2024.
Additionally, 446 permits and other privileges were issued for various activities
(such as, permits for Class A (liquor stores) or Class B (restaurants) to sell alcohol
10

--- Page 13 ---
on Sundays for off-premises consumption. Annual fees for alcoholic beverage
licenses are established in State law and vary depending on the type of
establishment and the beverages sold. Figure 2 includes the types of licenses
issued by BOLC and the related license fees. Additional permits and other
privileges with fees issued by BOLC are identified in Figure 3.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 2
Annual License Fees and Active Licenses as of January 24, 2024
Annual Total
License Type License Active
Fee Licenses
Class A Beer & Wine $500 1
Class A Beer, Wine, & Liquor $910 140
Class B Beer $365 3
Class B Beer and Wine $365 22
Class B Beer and Wine (Baseball Stadium) $2,420 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor $2,305 143
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Arts & Entertainment) $3,600 7
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Caterer) $4,480 5
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Convention Center) $22,000 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Development District) $3,025 10
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Educational Conference Facility) $5,175 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Education Conference Facility/Dining Service) $8,275 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Entertainment Concessionaire) $5,000 2
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Entertainment Facility) $22,000 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Equestrian Center Restaurant) $2,420 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Golf Course) $500 3
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Hotel) $5,000 24
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Luxury-Type Restaurant) $3,875 123
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Plus) $3,270 25
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Racetrack) $60 per day used 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Stadium) $21,780 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Theme Park) $4,290 1
Class B (Micro-brewery) $1,090 1
Class C Beer and Wine $245 1
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Concessionaire) $1,815 6
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Fraternal/Sororal/Service organization) $910 14
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Veterans' Organization or Club) $910 20
Class D Beer $500 8
Class D Beer and Wine $500 66
Class D Beer and Wine (Waterfront) $660 4
Total Licenses 637
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland, Rules and Regulations of the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George's County,
and BOLC's License Manager System
License Type Classes: A-Package Goods; B-Restaurant; C-Private Membership Club; D-Tavern and
Convenience Stores
12

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 3
Active Permits and Privileges and Related Fees
as of January 24, 2024
Number of
Permits and Other Privileges Annual Fee Active Permits
and Privileges
Special Entertainment Permit $1,500 89
Family Entertainment Permit $250 13
Beer Tasting License* $120 2
Beer and Wine Tasting License* $120 20
Beer, Wine, and Liquor Tasting License* $220 143
Delivery Permit (one-time advertising fee) $250 28
Distillery On-Premise Consumption Permit $500 2
Draft Beer Container Permit $500 12
Sunday Off-Sale Permit - Class A Beer, Wine, and
Liquor Only $2,590 118
Sunday Off-Sale Permit - Class B Beer, Wine, and
Liquor with an Off-Sale Privilege Only $1,080 19
Total Permits and Other Privileges 446
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland, Rules and Regulations of the Board of License Commissioners for
Prince George's County, and BOLC's License Manager System
* License is an add-on permit to provide additional privileges to existing license holders.
New and Transfer Licenses
Applicants for new licenses and license transfers complete and submit an
application form to BOLC, along with certain required documents and an
application fee ($700 for new licenses and $500 for transfers). This includes
submitting information for a criminal background check (for any new license
holders). A license transfer occurs when there is a change in ownership or
location.
Applications are processed by BOLC staff who ensure applicants include all
required information and pay the appropriate fees. The Board schedules public
hearings to review the new and transfer applications and to vote on approval of
the licenses. If approved, applicants must submit additional documents to BOLC
(such as a valid trader’s license and proof of personal property tax payment).
Once all documentation is submitted, BOLC staff will issue the license to the
applicant once the applicant has paid the applicable license fee. According to
BOLC records, in calendar year 2023, there were 34 new licenses and 41 transfers
issued.
13

--- Page 16 ---
License Renewals
BOLC emails all current licensees a renewal notice in January each year.
According to State law, licensees must file renewal applications by March 1,
April 1, and May 1 for Class A licenses, Class B licenses, and Classes C and D
licenses, respectively. Renewal applications with the applicable license and
permit fees (fees vary depending on the type of license and if there are any
permits associated with the license) are submitted to BOLC either by mail or in
person. BOLC may assess an extension fee of $1,000 for renewal applications
submitted after the applicable renewal deadline. BOLC staff process renewal
applications and related license and permit fee payments and issue the license to
the licensees. To retain their licenses, licensees must provide certain documents,
such as a copy of their current trader’s license and an affidavit confirming that
they have not been convicted of a felony.
Conclusion
BOLC Standard Operating Procedures did not specify the frequency for which
collections should be deposited. Our review disclosed that BOLC did not always
deposit collections in a timely manner.
Finding 1
BOLC did not always timely deposit license related collections.
Analysis
BOLC did not always timely deposit license related collections. For example, we
analyzed BOLC collection and deposit records from June 2022 to April 2024
(which we determined to be reliable for our audit purposes) that included 2,350
collections totaling $4.3 million. Our analysis disclosed that 993 of the
collections (or 42 percent) totaling $1.3 million were deposited from 6 to 26
business days after being received.
This condition was caused, at least in part, because BOLC’s Standard Operating
Procedures did not specify the frequency for which collections should be
deposited. In this regard, the County Administrative Procedures generally
requires deposits to be made no later than the next business day.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BOLC
a. deposit collections timely, such as daily; and
b. revise its SOP to specify the frequency for which deposits should be
performed.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Objective 2 – Inspections
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the inspection process was to evaluate the adequacy of BOLC
policies and procedures for conducting inspections of alcoholic beverage
licensees and maintaining related records, and to determine whether inspections
selected for review and testing were conducted in accordance with governing
laws, policies and procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies
and procedures established by the Board and BOLC administrative personnel
governing the inspection process and related records. Additionally, we
interviewed BOLC staff to determine the processes used to schedule, conduct,
record, and monitor inspections.
We obtained a data file, which we deemed reliable for our purposes, from the
inspection database maintained for BOLC by the Prince George’s County Office
of Information Technology. The database included 5,863 inspection-related
activities conducted during fiscal year 2023. We arbitrarily selected 25 licensees
to determine if inspections recorded in the inspection database were properly
documented with an inspection report. Furthermore, we performed a detailed
review of the inspection documentation to ensure inspections were conducted in
accordance with BOLC policies. We also analyzed the inspection database used
to record inspection dates and other relevant information to determine if all
licensed establishments received quarterly inspections in calendar year 2023.
Background
BOLC conducts periodic inspections of businesses licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages in Prince George’s County. State law does not specify the frequency of
or establish a schedule for required inspections, but BOLC Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) includes a goal to conduct routine inspections of each licensed
establishment at least once quarterly. BOLC primarily conducts the following
inspection activity:
 Routine inspections are standard in scope and ensure licensed establishments
are operating in compliance with requirements established for licensees by the
Rules and Regulations of the Board of License Commissioners for Prince
George's County, including having a current license properly displayed,
having applicable permits, not serving minors, and not serving after
authorized hours. Routine inspections are judgmentally assigned to all
inspectors to be completed daily according to existing circumstances, with the
goal of inspecting all licensees at least quarterly.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 Focused inspections are narrow in scope and address a specific requirement,
complaint, or common problem with licensees and are used for training
purposes. These inspections are assigned to inspectors as needed such as to
verify whether closed businesses are no longer selling alcoholic beverages
without a valid license.
 Underage Compliance inspections are conducted to identify licensees that
allow underaged individuals (under age 21) to illegally purchase alcoholic
beverages. The inspection is performed using at least two inspectors and a
minor operative, who attempts to purchase an alcoholic beverage at the
selected licensed establishment. There is no set number of these inspections
to be conducted as they are scheduled on an intermittent basis depending on
the availability of minor operatives (typically County Police cadets,
participants from the County Police's Explorers Program, or BOLC personnel,
who are under age 21) or in response to a complaint.
 Entertainment inspections are standard in scope and cover the basic
operating requirements established in various Board policies for licensees
with entertainment permits, including having applicable permits, not posing a
threat to the peace and safety of the community, not allowing underaged
individuals on the licensed premises, and not serving alcoholic beverages after
hours. Entertainment inspections are judgmentally assigned to all inspectors
to be completed daily according to existing circumstances, with the goal of
inspecting all permit holders at least quarterly.
Other Types of Inspection Activities:
 Investigation inspections of licensees are usually conducted based on
complaints or tips received from the public (such as for allegations of
underaged drinking or having entertainment without a permit), concerns noted
by inspectors during a routine inspection, or to follow up on a violation.
These investigations may be conducted with other government agencies such
as the Prince George’s County Police Department.
 New/transfer application activities are completed by inspectors at the site of a
proposed new license or the transfer of an existing license to another location
to post a sign and gather information. This information includes if the
location is the required distance away from schools and how many liquor
establishments are within a defined area.
 Sign-posting activities are completed by inspectors at a licensed establishment
or an establishment for which the license is pending Board approval. The
16

--- Page 19 ---
inspector places the sign and takes photos indicating it was placed and the
photos are then uploaded into the inspection database.
 One-day inspections occur for special events such as beer and wine festivals
to ensure the event is operating according to the Rules and Regulations of the
Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County.
Although there are approximately 637 licensees, based on Board policy and
professional judgment, many licensees are subject to multiple inspections of a
similar type (such as routine, entertainment, and underage compliance
inspections) or specialized inspections (such as related to a complaint), which are
often initiated by external sources. According to BOLC records, during fiscal
year 2023, BOLC conducted 5,863 inspections, which consisted of 4,901 routine
inspections, 10 focused inspections, 178 underage compliance inspections, 769
entertainment inspections, and 5 one-day license inspections. In addition, BOLC
conducted investigations in response to 9 complaints received directly by BOLC
during fiscal year 2023.
BOLC has written guidance over the Inspection Division operations referred to as
the Inspector’s Handbook, effective August 11, 2023. Additionally, the Rules
and Regulations for the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s
County, revised January 2024, provides specific guidance to licensees and is used
as criteria for determining violations. BOLC also has SOPs that were approved
by the Board.
Conclusion
Based on our review, BOLC had established adequate procedures over
inspections and inspections were conducted in accordance with governing laws,
policies and procedures.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for BOLC’s disciplinary process was to evaluate the disciplinary
procedures, BOLC’s compliance with applicable State laws, its enforcement of
applicable Board rules and regulations governing licensees, and its maintenance
of the related disciplinary records.
To accomplish this objective, we interviewed BOLC employees and reviewed the
Rules and Regulations for the Board of License Commissioners for Prince
George’s County to determine the procedures over disciplinary proceedings and
the process that occurs when it is determined that a violation may have occurred.
We also observed two public Board hearings in which cases resulting from
licensee violations were adjudicated. Additionally, we performed testing to
evaluate whether the disciplinary process was properly administered and
documented.
Background
The Board holds disciplinary proceedings to adjudicate licensee noncompliance
with State laws and the Rules and Regulations for the Board of License
Commissioners for Prince George’s County. Disciplinary proceedings result
from violations noted during licensee inspections, complaint inspections, and on
occasion referrals from the Prince George’s County Police Department and other
regulatory entities. Instances of licensee noncompliance are subject to internal
reviews prior to being sent to the Board for adjudication.
State law provides that the Board is charged with enforcing provisions of the
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The Board is also responsible for adjudicating cases to determine if violations
have occurred and for setting the related penalties. The Board generally holds
hearings twice a month in public sessions to adjudicate these cases, as well as to
grant new licenses and license transfers. The hearings are considered quasi-
judicial and include testimony from inspectors, police, and licensee
representatives, including counsel. The Board will obtain other information, as
needed (such as the licensee’s violations history), prior to making a decision and
determining whether a penalty is appropriate. The “preponderance of the
evidence” standard is used to determine if the licensee has been found in violation
of the Rules and Regulations for the Board of License Commissioners for Prince
George’s County. Licensees may appeal the decisions of the Board to the Circuit
Court.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Licensees are provided the Board’s rulings verbally at the hearing and in a written
Offer Letter if the ruling resulted in a penalty (fine, suspension, or revocation).
The Offer Letter includes the law or rule violated, the amount of the penalty, and
the amount of time the licensee has to pay the fine (usually up to 21 days). If the
licensee fails to pay the fine within 21 days, a $500 late fee is assessed, and the
licensee is subject to being summoned to appear before the Board for further
action.
The Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland includes penalty provisions for licensees found guilty of violating State
law and/or the Rules and Regulations for the Board of License Commissioners for
Prince George’s County.
 For a first offense, instead of or in addition to suspending or revoking the
license, the Board may impose a fine not exceeding $1,500 (unless the
offense is providing for or allowing underage consumption for which the
minimum fine is $1,500).
 For a second offense in a 24-month period, instead of or in addition to
suspending or revoking the license, the Board may impose a fine not
exceeding $6,000.
 For a third offense in a 24-month period, instead of or in addition to
suspending or revoking the license, the Board may impose a fine not
exceeding $7,500.
 The Board may also impose fines for violations related to entertainment
permits that can range from $1,000 to $12,500 per violation or revoke the
entertainment permit.
 The Board may revoke or suspend any license for any cause which, in the
judgment of the Board, is necessary to promote the peace or safety of the
community in which the place of business is situated.
 A license must be revoked or suspended under certain specific
circumstances (such as when a licensee is convicted of a felony that is
related to operations under the license).
According to BOLC’s records, in calendar year 2023 there were 82 fines assessed
by the Board totaling $199,500.
Conclusion
Based on our review, BOLC had established adequate procedures over
disciplinary proceedings in compliance with State laws and its own rules and
regulations.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine if adequate oversight exists over BOLC
operations. To accomplish this objective, we reviewed Board approved SOPs,
interviewed BOLC employees, and reviewed and tested BOLC’s procedures with
respect to cash receipts, timesheet submissions, personnel evaluations, system
access, financial disclosures, and potential conflicts of interest. Our review was
restricted to BOLC oversight of its operations and compliance with certain
County policies. Our review did not include an assessment of the appropriateness
or suitability (to achieve the stated purpose) of the County governance practices
or policies.
As noted earlier, BOLC is governed by a five-person board of Commissioners,
appointed by the County Executive of Prince George’s County, subject to
confirmation by the Maryland Senate. During our audit, we noted that the current
Commissioners had not been appointed and confirmed in accordance with Section
26-202 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland. After bringing this to the attention of BOLC management, it
contacted the County Executive’s Office and the County issued new appointments
for all five Commissioners. However, these appointments were still contingent on
Senate confirmation as of the end of our audit fieldwork in June 2024.
Conclusion
We determined that Finding 2 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the conclusion and the finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with BOLC’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
20

--- Page 23 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 24 ---
Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Objective 1 – Licensing
Finding 1
BOLC did not always timely deposit license related collections.
We recommend that BOLC
a. deposit collections timely, such as daily; and
b. revise its SOP to specify the frequency for which deposits should be
performed.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2025
Please provide details of The BOLC agrees with the County that deposits should be made no later
corrective action or than the next business day. With the addition of the new licensing
explain disagreement. software suite (expected completion 9/2025), deposits will be done in a
timelier manner when staffing levels are appropriate to complete this
task.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2025
Please provide details of We will align the SOP with County government recommendations upon
corrective action or implementation of the new licensing software.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 25 ---
Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 2 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including the
analysis, related recommendation(s), along with BOLC’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, BOLC’s responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Garrett A. White
Staff Auditors