Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023
Date: 02/04/2025
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67a283ba1b1def2a3f454cdc
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:14:46.802869
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 4, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ms. Catherine J. Motz, Chair
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Ms. Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) by 15 of the
State’s community colleges for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023.
Our review disclosed that the community colleges and their independent auditors
substantially complied with the applicable statutes and the guidelines promulgated
by MHEC. Specifically, all opinions expressed by the colleges’ independent
auditors stated that the applicable financial statements were fairly presented in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. We did note that three colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted net
position as of June 30, 2023.
Additionally, the independent auditor report for one college noted a material
weakness related to certain compliance requirements for fiscal year 2023. MHEC
evaluated the adequacy of the college’s response to the material weakness and
concluded that appropriate corrective actions were proposed.

--- Page 4 ---
A draft copy of this report was provided to MHEC for review and comment.
Since there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not
necessary.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Purpose of Review and Background Information
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) by 15 of the
State’s community colleges1 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023. We
reviewed these audit reports to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted
net position, or uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the
results of that review.
According to the State’s records, State aid totaling approximately $457 million
was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16 community colleges for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2023. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and student
enrollment data as well as certain retirement benefits and various grants.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires MHEC to adopt guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on
the colleges. The guidelines promulgated by MHEC as State regulations require
independent auditors to express opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the
colleges’ financial statements as well as of the cost and student enrollment data
used for calculating the State aid to the colleges. The guidelines also require the
auditors to issue management letters containing all material weaknesses in the
colleges’ systems of internal controls. While not required, many of the auditors
issue management letters that contain additional recommendations that were not
considered material weaknesses.
1 The sixteenth college is Baltimore City Community College (BCCC), which is a budgetary unit
of the State and receives an annual State appropriation. BCCC is not subject to the Education
Article, Section 16-315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, but obtains annual financial
statement audits conducted by a certified public accounting firm. BCCC is also subject to fiscal
compliance audits by the Office of Legislative Audits for which a separate audit report is issued.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
All 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2023 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2023 were filed timely with the Maryland Higher Education
Commission (MHEC). The State’s community colleges are required by law to
file annual audit reports within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an
extension is granted.
All 15 audit reports expressed unqualified opinions and were presented in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2023, contained unqualified opinions from their independent
auditors and were presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing
standards. MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to
the fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the
audits be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
An unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable
financial statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Financial Statements
Three community colleges’ financial statements disclosed deficit balances in
the unrestricted portion of their net position as of June 30, 2023.
Our review disclosed three colleges with deficit balances in the unrestricted
component of their net position as of June 30, 2023, a condition noted for several
years at each of these colleges (see Figure 1 on the following page). An
unrestricted net position deficit balance represents expenses for current or past
services that will need to be financed with funds related to future periods and
could indicate a potential financial problem.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
Colleges with Deficit Unrestricted Balances as of June 30, 2023
Condition
College Deficit Repeated Since
Fiscal Year
Anne Arundel Community College $41,826,321 2011
Community College of Baltimore County $86,270,341 2016
Carroll Community College $14,717,522 2009
Our review of the colleges’ financial statements disclosed that the unrestricted net
position deficits could be attributed at least in part to other postemployment
benefit (OPEB) liabilities, which as of June 30, 2023, totaled $61.4 million for
Anne Arundel Community College; $116.0 million for Community College of
Baltimore County; and $16.5 million for Carroll Community College. Generally
accepted accounting principles specify that liabilities for postemployment benefits
(such as healthcare benefits), which are deferred until retirement or another future
event, be recognized in the years in which the employee provides services rather
than during the postemployment period when payments are made.
Management Letters and Compliance
Independent auditor management letters for 7 colleges included 8
recommendations for improvement, including one that was considered a
material weakness.
Our review of the independent auditors’ management letters disclosed that 7
community colleges received a total of 8 recommendations (see Figure 2 on the
following page) including one resulting from a material weakness and one
repeated from the preceding year. Specifically, the independent auditor’s
management letter for Montgomery College noted a material weakness that the
College reported incorrect enrollment status, program begin dates, and effective
withdraw dates to the U.S. Department of Education. As required by the
Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, MHEC
5

--- Page 8 ---
evaluated the adequacy of Montgomery College’s response to the material
weakness and determined that appropriate corrective action was indicated.
Figure 2
Management Letter Recommendations for
Fiscal Year 2023
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation
Recommendations
Financial aid 5
Grants and contracts 1
Accounting and financial reporting 2
Total 8
MHEC was not required to formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’
responses to the remaining 7 recommendations since, in accordance with
MHEC’s guidelines, comments and suggestions related to non-material
deficiencies are not required. However, the colleges’ follow-up actions are
subject to the auditors’ reviews during subsequent audits.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor