Title: Maryland 529
Date: 02/03/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67a3bb6f310e48477a7ece85
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:14:37.561839
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland 529
February 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 3, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Maryland 529 for the period
beginning July 1, 2018 and ending May 31, 2023. Maryland 529 administered the
Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer College Investment Plan (MCIP) and the
Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer Prepaid College Trust (MPCT), to help
individuals save for future college expenses and to reduce dependence on student
loans and other forms of debt. The plans also provide account holders with
certain Maryland income tax benefits. Effective June 1, 2023 the Maryland 529
Board was abolished and all Maryland 529 programs, functions, and operations
were transferred to the State Treasurer’s Office (STO).
MCIP allows individuals to invest funds to help pay the cost of college education
for designated beneficiaries, and is managed by a private investment company.
As of June 30, 2023, 280,175 beneficiaries had accounts with balances totaling
approximately $7.9 billion. MPCT offers tuition contracts, purchased by
individuals on behalf of beneficiaries, which require scheduled payments for the
future cost of tuition and fees at eligible institutions of higher education. MPCT
is now managed by a private investment company and, as of June 30, 2023, the
value of MPCT investments for 31,175 tuition contracts was $1.3 billion.
Our audit found that Maryland 529 did not have adequate oversight of the
conversion of MPCT operations including critical business rules and account data
provided to the Third Party Administrator (TPA). Additionally, Maryland 529 did
not take sufficient action to address delinquent or expired MPCT accounts, and
had not collected fees totaling $1.6 million collected by the TPA from account
holders to be used for Maryland 529 operating expenses.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of seven of the nine
findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings, we determined that Maryland 529 satisfactorily addressed these
six findings.
STO’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We have
edited STO’s response to remove a vendor name, as allowed by our policy.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of STO’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of STO’s response which will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge STO’s willingness to address the audit issues and
implement corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Transfer of 529 Plans to the Maryland State Treasurer’s Office 4
Financial Activity 5
Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) 6
Maryland College Investment Plan (MCIP) 10
Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience 10
Financial Statement Audits 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Conversion to Third Party Administrator (TPA)
Finding 1 – Maryland 529 did not have adequate oversight of the 13
conversion of MPCT operations, including critical business rules and
account data provided to the TPA.
Delinquent and Expired MPCT Accounts
Finding 2 – Maryland 529 did not take sufficient action to address 14
delinquent and expired MPCT accounts.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 16
Account Holder Fees
Finding 4 – Maryland 529 did not obtain fees totaling $1.6 million 16
collected by the MPCT TPA from account holders.
Maryland College Investment Plan (MCIP)
Finding 5 – Maryland 529 did not ensure that the MCIP TPA assessed and 17
remitted fees as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 18
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Maryland 529 was an independent State agency that provided two separate
college savings plans, the Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer Prepaid
College Trust (MPCT), and the Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer College
Investment Plan (MCIP), to help individuals save for future college expenses and
to reduce dependence on student loans and other forms of debt. State law
authorized Maryland 529 to establish a third plan option, the Maryland Broker-
Dealer College Investment Plan, which would allow contributions to an
investment account through private investment firms selected by the account
holder; however as of May 31, 2023, the plan was not operating as the Maryland
529 Board had not opted to offer this plan.
These plans were administered by the Maryland 529 Board which, by State law,
included the Secretary of the Maryland Higher Education Commission, the
Secretary of the Maryland Department of Disabilities, the State Superintendent of
Schools, the State Treasurer, the State Comptroller, the Chancellor of the
University System of Maryland, and five members of the public appointed by the
Governor.
Individuals seeking to participate in a college savings plan could execute a
prepaid tuition contract through MPCT and/or establish an investment account in
the MCIP. Students may use their accounts at nearly any accredited college
nationwide.
Transfer of 529 Plans to the Maryland State Treasurer’s Office
Chapter 113, Laws of Maryland 2023, abolished the Maryland 529 Board and
transferred all Maryland 529 related programs, functions, and operations to the
State Treasurer’s Office (STO) effective June 1, 2023. Additionally, the law
began a phase out of the MPCT, prohibiting any new MPCT account enrollments
as of the aforementioned date.
This audit included activities of Maryland 529 through May 31, 2023, including
certain conditions that we believe contributed to the issues addressed in the
Treasurer’s Decision Memorandum (refer to page 9 for additional details) and the
decision to transfer all Maryland 529 functions and operations to the State
Treasurer. Since Maryland 529 is now a unit within STO, this report and all
recommendations in this report have been addressed to the STO. Although this
report may reference certain activity occurring after May 31, 2023, such as the
4

--- Page 7 ---
issuance of the Treasurer’s Decision Memorandum, Maryland 529 activities
occurring subsequent to that date will be subject to examination in our next audit
of STO.
Financial Activity
According to the State’s records, Maryland 529’s expenditures totaled
approximately $14.7 million during fiscal year 2023 (see Figure 1 on the
following page). This amount reflects a significant increase from our preceding
report on Maryland 529 due primarily to State contributions to MCIP for
Maryland residents totaling $7.4 million (as noted in Figure 1), and contractual
service expenditures totaling $5.3 million. As of June 30, 2023, 14 of the total 28
positions were vacant. Maryland 529 management advised us that 13 of the
vacant positions primarily related to MPCT customer services that were assumed
by the MPCT Third Party Administrator (TPA).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
Maryland 529 Positions, Expenditures, and Funding
Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 11 39.3%
Frozen 3 10.7%
Vacant* 14 50.0%
Total 28
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $ 1,534,125 10.5%
Technical and Special Fees 47,086 0.3%
Operating Expenses 5,762,413 39.2%
Other Expenses** 7,351,750 50.0%
Total $ 14,695,374
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Non-Budgeted Fund $ 14,695,374 100.0%
Total $ 14,695,374
Source: State financial and personnel records
*Maryland 529 management advised the vacant positions primarily related to MPCT customer
services that were assumed by the TPA.
**Maryland 529 received funding from the Maryland Higher Education Commissions (MHEC) to
administer the Save4College Program that provides matching contributions to eligible accounts in the
MCIP.
Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT)
MPCT offered tuition contracts for the future payment of tuition and mandatory
fees at any eligible institution of higher education. Contracts, which require
scheduled payments, were purchased by individuals on behalf of a designated
beneficiary. State law requires that either the account holder or the beneficiary be
a resident of Maryland or the District of Columbia at the time that a contract was
6

--- Page 9 ---
purchased. As previously noted, no new contracts were permitted after May 31,
2023, but contracts existing at that time remain.
Maryland 529 did not guarantee that the assets of MPCT will be sufficient to pay
the tuition and fees estimated under the contracts. However, in the event that the
market value of MPCT’s assets is not sufficient to fund its contract obligations,
State law provides that State funds may be appropriated to fund the shortfall.
State law also specifies that the debts and contract obligations of MPCT are not
debts of the State.
Figure 2 provides selected MPCT funding data for fiscal years 2018 through
2023. According to State records, as of June 30, 2023, Maryland 529 was
supporting 31,175 MPCT accounts with 27,587 unique beneficiaries.
Figure 2
Select MPCT Financial Information
(expressed in millions)
Funded
Fiscal Year Total Assets Surplus
Ratio
2023 $1,293.7 146.4% $398.4
2022 $1,249.7 140.0% $355.6
2021 $1,403.4 161.4% $525.4
2020 $1,215.9 180.9% $538.7
2019 $1,235.1 163.0% $470.2
2018 $1,229.8 155.0% $432.5
S ource: Audited Financial Statements
Our preceding audit report noted significant management turnover and an
overwhelming lack of documentation supporting effective oversight of MPCT by
the Maryland 529 Board. We also noted a lack of documentation of the
investigative steps taken and conclusions reached regarding numerous
recordkeeping and accounting discrepancies that had been identified by STO and
Maryland 529 personnel subsequent to the departure of the former Chief
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer in May 2015. In response to these
issues, we recommended that Maryland 529 obtain a forensic audit.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Forensic Audit Report
In response to our prior report recommendation, Maryland 529 contracted with an
accounting firm to conduct the forensic audit which issued its report in March
2021. The report concluded that Maryland 529 took certain steps to address
issues that led to the findings in our report including updating its automated
records and implementing and improving processes, policies, and procedures to
mitigate the risk of these issues recurring in the future. However, the firm noted
that in many cases, the specific record of the applicable accounts and transactions
in question could not be located, and as a result, the firm could not confirm that
the related issues had been addressed. While the firm ultimately did not identify
any significant deficiencies, this may have been caused, in part, by the lack of
available documentation.
The firm also agreed with findings identified by STO and commented upon in our
preceding audit report regarding potential irregularities relating to accounts held
by a former senior management employee at Maryland 529. As noted in our
preceding report, these findings were submitted by Maryland 529’s legal counsel
to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division in September 2015. At
the time of our current audit, Maryland 529 had no information regarding the
status of its referral.
MPCT Third Party Administrator (TPA)
In December 2020, Maryland 529 entered into a $15.7 million contract (including
option years) with a TPA to manage MPCT through November 2028. The
contract provided for conversion of MPCT data from Maryland 529 records to an
automated system maintained by the TPA. The TPA was to conduct day-to-day
operations previously performed by Maryland 529 staff, such as determining
account holder and beneficiary eligibility, servicing requests for modifications to
accounts, making benefit payments, and ensuring the accuracy of account
information. The TPA would also provide an account portal for account holders
to access current data regarding their accounts. The new automated
recordkeeping system went live in November 2021. According to State
accounting records, as of June 2023, fees paid to the TPA totaled $3.6 million.
Board Changes to MPCT
In June 2021, the Maryland 529 Board approved certain MPCT changes, effective
November 1, 2021, regarding a rate of return to be used for calculating a
8

--- Page 11 ---
minimum benefit amount for MPCT accounts, as well as for calculating rollover
and refund amounts requested by account holders.1 The purpose of MPCT was to
provide a guaranteed payment of college costs within specified limits, not to serve
as an investment vehicle for the account holder. However, State law did authorize
the Board to provide a “rebate” to account holders if the Trust exceeded a 130
percent funding level.
According to the minutes of its June 25, 2021 meeting, the Board endorsed a rate
of 6 percent applied to balances held prior to November 1, 2021 to calculate
minimum account benefits and refund and rollover amounts. The 10-year United
States Treasury rate would be applied to contributions made after that date.
However, ambiguity existed in the Board’s intentions, implementation of the
Board’s decision, and certain disclosures made to account holders regarding their
account balances. The ensuing actions taken to implement the Board’s decision
resulted in significant confusion, uncertainty, and disagreement by MPCT
stakeholders.
MPCT Interest Suspension
In April 2022, Maryland 529 management instructed the TPA to suspend the
application of earnings to account holders amid escalating questions and concerns
regarding the calculation and accuracy of earnings amounts being posted to
accounts since the November 2021 effective date. Between April 2022 and April
2023 a series of steps were taken by the Maryland 529 Board and staff, TPA,
State Treasurer, outside legal counsel, and certain other contracted vendors to
address those questions and concerns. Specifically, these parties examined the
Board’s intentions in implementing the aforementioned changes, the actual
ensuing calculation and application of earnings to account balances, disclosures
made to account holders regarding their account balances, and account funds
being made available to account holders. The ongoing concerns ultimately
resulted in legislative intervention.
State Treasurer’s Office
The STO’s Decision Memorandum issued on July 10, 2023 detailed the
progression of events leading to the current conditions of confusion and
disagreement among stakeholders, and in particular, concluded that there was a
lack of clarity regarding application of the 6 percent rate for purposes of
determining minimum account benefits. The Memorandum explained that the
Board’s intent was to apply the rate prospectively beginning November 1, 2021 to
1 An MPCT account holder may request a transfer (rollover) of MPCT account funds to the
Maryland College investment Plan or to another 529 account (such as in another state) or may
request a refund of the account.
9

--- Page 12 ---
all balances in accounts on October 31, 2021, but the rate was instead being
applied retroactively to the date of contribution. According to the Memorandum,
this difference between the intended application and the actual application
resulted in substantial dollar value discrepancies for some account holders as to
what those account holders understood to be their account balance and what the
Board actually intended.
In order to bring these ongoing concerns to resolution, the State Treasurer
determined that for account contributions made prior to November 1, 2021, the
annual earnings rate will be 6 percent compounded monthly, applied retroactively.
For account contributions posted to an account on or after November 1, 2021, the
annual earnings rate will be a rate equal to the 10-year Treasury note compounded
monthly. These rates will remain in effect until the earlier of July 1, 2024, the
date benefits are withdrawn, or the contract termination date. Beginning on a date
no later than July 1, 2024 all contributions and all balances in an account will earn
no interest for the account holder.
Maryland College Investment Plan (MCIP)
MCIP was established to allow individuals to invest funds to help pay the cost of
providing a college education for designated beneficiaries. Maryland 529
executed a contract with a private investment company that is responsible for
managing MCIP by processing Plan enrollment applications, investing related
payments, and disbursing funds. The current contract will expire in June 2028.
Earnings on funds invested in MCIP and the future principal value of individual
accounts are not guaranteed. Payments into the investment plan will be accepted
provided the aggregate balance of all accounts for a designated beneficiary does
not exceed $500,000. Account holders and designated beneficiaries participating
in MCIP are not required to be residents of Maryland or the District of Columbia.
State law provides State income tax benefits for Maryland taxpayers who elect to
participate in MCIP based on their contributions. Specifically, the Tax-General
Article, Section 10-208 of the Annotated Code of Maryland allows a taxpayer to
deduct up to $2,500 in annual contributions for any tax year, for each qualified
beneficiary, for the purpose of calculating his or her Maryland adjusted gross
income.
Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience
Chapter 39, laws of Maryland 2016 established the Maryland Achieving a Better
Life Experience (ABLE) program, under Maryland 529’s oversight, to allow
individuals to invest funds to help individuals with disabilities maintain health,
10

--- Page 13 ---
independence, and quality of life. Assets in an ABLE account in Maryland or in
any other state may not be considered for determining eligibility for assistance or
benefits from local or state means-tested programs. For social security benefits,
up to $100,000 held in an ABLE account is not counted toward the $2,000 asset
limit. Annual contributions may not exceed $17,0002 and lifetime contributions
may not exceed $500,000.
Maryland 529 executed a contract, dated September 7, 2017, with a private
investment company that is responsible for managing ABLE by processing Plan
enrollment applications, investing related payments, and disbursing funds. ABLE
enrollment opened in November 2017, and the current contract will expire in
September 2025. Earnings on funds invested in ABLE and the future principal
value of individual accounts are not guaranteed. Account holders and designated
beneficiaries participating in ABLE are not required to be residents of Maryland
or the District of Columbia.
Financial Statement Audits
Maryland 529 engaged independent certified public accounting firms to audit its
annual financial statements for MPCT, MCIP, and ABLE (beginning with fiscal
year 2018) programs. In the related audit reports for the fiscal years ended 2019,
2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023, the firms stated that the financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial positions of MPCT, MCIP,
and ABLE, and the changes in their financial positions and cash flows for the
years then ended, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of seven of the nine
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated December 3, 2019. For the
non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that Maryland 529
satisfactorily addressed these six findings.
2 The annual contribution limits are adjusted annually by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Annual
contribution limit noted here was for calendar year 2023.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
There was an overwhelming lack of specific documentation supporting
whether effective oversight was provided by the Maryland 529 Board
regarding Maryland 529’s Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT)
Finding 1 operations during the audit period, particularly in light of the recurring Not repeated
management turnover, discovered unprocessed business documents, and
irregularities with a former employee’s accounts. In addition, there was
a significant lack of documentation supporting investigative steps taken,
findings, and conclusions reached.
Maryland 529’s procedures did not require that independent supervisory
Finding 2 reviews of calculations supporting disbursement transactions be Not repeated
documented, and our testing of a limited number of disbursements
disclosed certain errors in the amounts paid.
Adjustments to Maryland 529 MPCT accounts were unilaterally Not repeated
Finding 3
processed and were not subject to independent supervisory review and (Not followed up on)
approval. Such transactions exceeded $32.1 million for fiscal year 2018.
Maryland 529 did not prepare adequate bank reconciliations for three
Finding 4 bank accounts used to administer MPCT activities, and certain Not repeated
reconciliations we reviewed lacked documentation of supervisory
review.
Maryland 529 did not determine the disposition of uncashed checks from
Finding 5 Not repeated
2014, nor did it take action to determine the applicability of the
Maryland Abandoned Property Act to its trust accounts.
(Policy Issue) Maryland 529’s methodology for calculating disbursement
Finding 6 Not repeated
amounts for MPCT account holder refunds and rollovers (transfers), in
our opinion often resulted in excessive payments.
Maryland 529 did not adequately monitor access granted to the
Finding 7 automated system used to administer MPCT. We identified improper Not repeated
access for 26 system users, including 11 former employees whose access
had not been disabled.
Maryland 529 lacked assurance that the automated system used for
Finding 8 Status Redacted3
administration of MPCT was sufficiently protected against operational
and security risks.
Controls were not established to ensure that all mail collections for Not repeated
Finding 9
MPCT were properly accounted for and deposited. (Not followed up on)
3Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Conversion to Third Party Administrator (TPA)
Finding 1
Maryland 529 did not have adequate oversight of the conversion of
Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) operations, including critical
business rules and account data provided to the TPA.
Analysis
Maryland 529 did not have adequate oversight of the conversion of MPCT
operations, including critical business rules and account data provided to the TPA.
Failure to Ensure the TPA System Issues Were Corrected
Maryland 529 relied on the TPA to conduct data transfer and system functionality
testing, and permitted the system to go live despite discrepancies with the data.
Unresolved discrepancies at the time the TPA system went live were documented
by the TPA in a Data Reconciliation Remediation Plan (DRRP), which was
approved by Maryland 529 in November 2021. The DRRP identified 29 different
types of discrepancies applicable to 5,7444 accounts. Maryland 529 did not track
the status of discrepancies noted on the DRRP, and we were unable to determine
if any of the account discrepancies we noted as of June 30, 2023 were also on the
November 2021 DRRP or were the result of new activity.
Our review of data extracts from the TPA system of 64,901 accounts (31,175
active, and 33,726 inactive) as of June 30, 2023 disclosed discrepancies that had
still not been corrected more than a year after the system start date. For example,
we noted the following:
 1,411 accounts established prior to transition in the new TPA system had no
corresponding record in Maryland 529’s prior records,
 5,546 accounts in the new system for which the original contract amount and
the account holder’s payment schedule (which should be the same) differed by
at least $1,000, and
 2,107 accounts classified as paid in full even though the total of recorded
payments for each of these accounts was less than the recorded contract
amount. The 2,107 accounts had contracts totaling $26.8 million, including
268 accounts with contracts totaling $10.1 million that were marked paid
4 This total may include some duplication since the same account may have multiple error types
and be included in the 5,744 more than once.
13

--- Page 16 ---
despite having no payments recorded. We could not readily determine the
total difference between payments for the remaining accounts due to the lack
of available records.
Failure to Confirm Critical Business Rules
The Maryland 529 Board and staff, in conjunction with the TPA, did not
collectively verify, prior to system implementation, that the TPA had established
in its system the business rules which would accurately calculate and properly
apply the rate of return approved by the Board. According to a senior
management employee, Maryland 529 did not adequately review the business
rules during the transition, but instead relied on the TPA’s expertise. This lack of
collective agreement and verification contributed, at least in part, to the ensuing
confusion, uncertainty, and disagreement related to the interest earnings and rate
of return as previously mentioned on page 9.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the State Treasurer’s Office (STO)
a. ensure that all discrepancies noted with the conversion of MPCT
operations and data to the TPA are satisfactorily resolved, including
those noted in this finding;
b. ensure that sufficient oversight is exercised over any future system and
data conversion activities; and
c. ensure business rules established by the TPA are functioning as intended.
Delinquent and Expired MPCT Accounts
Finding 2
Maryland 529 did not take sufficient action to address delinquent and
expired MPCT accounts.
Analysis
Maryland 529 did not take sufficient action to address delinquent and expired
MPCT accounts.
Delinquent Accounts
Maryland 529 did not pursue collection of delinquent accounts. Our review of
Maryland 529 records identified 1,367 MPCT accounts as of June 2023 with one
or more payments that were delinquent for periods ranging from 60 days to over
20 years. Another 350 accounts had no payments made as of June 2023. As of
this date, the initial payments had not been made and were delinquent by between
14

--- Page 17 ---
90 days to over 19 years.5 Maryland 529 did not send dunning notices to these
delinquent account holders and did not assess late fees ranging from $10 to $150
per month as provided for in each account holder’s contract. In December 2021,
Maryland 529 updated the MPCT disclosure statement to notify account holders
that dunning notices would be sent at 30, 60, and 90 day intervals but as of June
2023 no notices had been issued.
Expired Accounts
Maryland 529 did not have procedures to routinely identify and address expired
MPCT accounts. MPCT accounts expire for purposes of benefit distribution 10
years (plus the number of school years purchased) after the beneficiary is first
eligible to use the account benefits.6 According to Maryland 529’s records, as of
July 2023, there were 2,645 active accounts with contributions totaling
approximately $14.1 million, that had exceeded their expiration date by 5 to 20
years.
Based on an opinion received by Maryland 529 from the Office of the Attorney
General, funds in expired accounts are not subject to the Maryland Uniform
Disposition of Abandoned Property Act (Maryland Abandoned Property Act).
Accordingly, associated funds would not be transferred to the Comptroller of
Maryland’s Unclaimed Property Division. Maryland 529 had not determined the
proper disposition for these funds which remained active in its records, which
could lead to errors or other potential discrepancies, including misuse of account
funds.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that STO develop procedures to
a. pursue collection of delinquent accounts (including those noted above),
send routine delinquency notices, and impose and collect late fees
provided for in account holder contracts; and
b. identify and address expired accounts, including those noted above.
5 None of these accounts, except one, had reached maturity and as a result generally would not be
authorized to receive payment of tuition and fees.
6 The termination date could be extended due to active military service or receipt of a waiver
approved by the Maryland 529 Board. Upon termination, account holders have certain options,
such as receiving a refund of account funds.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with STO’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Account Holder Fees
Finding 4
Maryland 529 did not obtain fees totaling $1.6 million collected by the MPCT
TPA from account holders.
Analysis
Maryland 529 did not obtain fees for the period November 2021 through June
2023 totaling $1.6 million collected by the MPCT TPA from account holders to
be used to offset MPCT operating expenses. The fees were collected by the TPA
along with routine account holder payments, but were not transferred to Maryland
529. Rather, the fees were deposited and held by the TPA in a depository
account, which was established to hold MPCT funds required for tuition
payments, rollovers, or refunds.
Maryland 529 management advised that it did not require the MPCT TPA to
transfer the funds since the fees are properly reflected in Maryland 529’s records
and financial statements and were not needed during these years to offset
Maryland 529’s operating costs. However, leaving the fees commingled with
Trust funds in the TPA’s account deprives Maryland 529 of the related interest
earnings and decreases control and accountability over the funds.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that STO obtain all fees collected by the MPCT TPA,
including those noted above.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland College Investment Plan (MCIP)
Finding 5
Maryland 529 did not ensure that the MCIP TPA assessed and remitted fees
as required.
Analysis
Maryland 529 did not ensure that the MCIP TPA assessed and remitted all
required fees. The MCIP TPA was responsible for collecting certain fees from
account holders based on a percentage of the account holder’s MCIP balance. A
portion of these fees was to be retained by the MCIP TPA and a portion was to be
remitted to Maryland 529 to offset operating costs. According to Maryland 529’s
records, during fiscal year 2023, approximately $4.0 million was remitted to
Maryland 529, and $2.4 million was retained by the MCIP TPA.
Our review disclosed that Maryland 529 did not ensure that the amount assessed
and remitted by the MCIP TPA was proper. Specifically, the TPA provided a
schedule of fees assessed to Maryland 529, but there was no verification of the
reported information (such as a determination of fees due based on managed
assets) to ensure the MCIP TPA properly assessed and remitted all the required
fees. Our test of five consecutive monthly invoices during calendar year 2023
determined the amount assessed and remitted by the MCIP TPA was proper.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that STO establish procedures to ensure the MCIP TPA
assesses and remits all required fees.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Maryland 529 for the period
beginning July 1, 2018 and ending May 31, 2023. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine Maryland 529’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included administering the Maryland College Investment
Plan (MCIP) and Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT), procurements and
disbursements, and information systems security and control. We also determined
the status of seven of the nine findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Maryland 529 engaged independent certified public accounting firms to perform
audits of the plans’ financial statements for MCIP, MPCT, and the Maryland
Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) programs. In the related audit
reports for the fiscal years ended 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023, the firm
stated that these financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial positions and respective net position of MCIP, MPCT, and ABLE in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firms to
provide audit coverage of certain aspects of Maryland 529’s operations
(investments of the MCIP and MPCT). Our audit procedures in these areas were
generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2018 and ending May 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
18

--- Page 21 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Maryland 529’s operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data), and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from Maryland 529’s prior MPCT system and the
automated systems used by Maryland 529’s contracted vendors to administer
MCIP and MPCT for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as collection and
disbursement activity. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
During our audit period, Maryland 529’s management was responsible for
establishing and maintaining effective internal control. With the transfer of
Maryland 529 operations to the Maryland State Treasurer effective June 1, 2023,
those functions became the responsibility of the State Treasurer. Internal control
is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to
the reliability of financial records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations,
including safeguarding of assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there
are five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment,
control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the
five components, when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to
Maryland 529, were considered by us during the course of this audit.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect Maryland 529’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Maryland State Treasurer’s Office (STO) that
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of this cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to STO and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from STO to our findings and recommendations are included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
20

--- Page 23 ---
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise STO regarding the results of our review of its
response.
21

--- Page 24 ---
APPENDIX
Dereck E. Davis
State Treasurer
Jonathan D. Martin
Chief Deputy Treasurer
January 27, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Enclosed, please find STO responses to certain disclosures in connection with the draft audit report for the Maryland
529 audit of the Office of the State Treasurer (STO) for the period beginning July 1, 2018, and ending May 31, 2023.
If you have any questions, please contact Jonathan Martin, Chief Deputy Treasurer at jmartin@treasurer.state.md.us.
Sincerely,
Dereck E. Davis
State Treasurer
LOUIS L. GOLDSTEIN TREASURY BUILDING, 80 CALVERT ST., ROOM 109, ANNAPOLIS, MD 21401
410-260-7533 DIRECT  800-322-4296 TOLL FREE  800-735-2258 TTY
410-260-7160 TREASURER  410-260-7080 CHIEF DEPUTY TREASURER
https://treasurer.state.md.us

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Conversion to Third Party Administrator (TPA)
Finding 1
Maryland 529 did not have adequate oversight of the conversion of Maryland Prepaid
College Trust (MPCT) operations, including critical business rules and account data
provided to the TPA.
We recommend that the State Treasurer’s Office (STO)
a. ensure that all discrepancies noted with the conversion of MPCT operations and
data to the TPA are satisfactorily resolved, including those noted in this finding;
b. ensure that sufficient oversight is exercised over any future system and data
conversion activities; and
c. ensure business rules established by the TPA are functioning as intended.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any The State Treasurer’s Office (STO) took over responsibility for Maryland 529 and its various programs on
concerns with June 1, 2023, at the direction of the Maryland General Assembly and the Governor. The conversion and
factual accuracy. outsourcing of the Maryland Prepaid College Trust, including business rules and account data, occurred
throughout 2021, and was finalized before STO assumed responsibility of the program. While STO cannot
speak to the oversight present at the time of the conversion, the agency implemented multiple policy changes
that better protect the relevant interests of account holders going forward. STO first endeavored to address
the most pressing account holder issue, which was setting the earnings rate for accounts and ensuring that
account holders received access to their funds as soon as possible. By prioritizing accounts with beneficiaries
who matriculated in the fall of 2023, STO was able to ensure that those account holders had access to their
funds quickly in order to make payments in a timely manner.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Ongoing
a
Please provide STO continues to evaluate account holder data to resolve issues as they are identified. The work
details of is impacted by the quality of the historical data – an issue previously highlighted by OLA.
corrective action
or explain
disagreement.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Ongoing
b
Please provide While the work required to address the recommendations in this finding is ongoing and impacted by
details of data limitations, it has resulted in greater oversight of the State’s program manager.
corrective action
or explain
disagreement.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Ongoing
c
Please provide Following STO oversight, the Office revisited the creation of business rules and best practices and has since
details of implemented additional rules to further strengthen the efficiency of the Maryland Prepaid College Trust
corrective action program. Additionally, STO established agreements with outside vendors to verify the accuracy of account
or explain values and ensure implementation of new business rules for the State’s Program Manager to execute.
disagreement.
Delinquent and Expired MPCT Accounts
Finding 2
Maryland 529 did not take sufficient action to address delinquent and expired MPCT
accounts.
We recommend that STO develop procedures to
a. pursue collection of delinquent accounts (including those noted above), send routine
delinquency notices, and impose and collect late fees provided for in account holder
contracts; and
b. identify and address expired accounts, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Background / Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any STO assumed responsibility of Maryland 529 after the audit period but agrees
concerns with factual with this finding and will continue to work to research and address account
accuracy. issues including those identified in the audit.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of With the implementation of new business rules, STO plans to address
corrective action or delinquent accounts.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of With the implementation of new business rules, STO plans to address expired
corrective action or accounts.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity,”
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the
finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with STO’s responses, have
been redacted from this report copy, STO’s responses indicated agreement with the finding and
related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Account Holder Fees
Finding 4
Maryland 529 did not obtain fees totaling $1.6 million collected by the MPCT TPA from
account holders.
We recommend that STO obtain all fees collected by the MPCT TPA, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any Instead of receiving a monthly ACH transfer, the program previously
concerns with factual allowed the TPA to keep the money in their custody account to use
accuracy. towards distributions, thus requiring the conversion of assets to cash to
be less frequent.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/1/2025
Please provide details of In November 2024, STO implemented a new process requiring the TPA
corrective action or to send an ACH transfer of all due funds directly to the program’s
explain disagreement. operating account. Additionally, STO is currently pursuing the past
amounts due to the program to be received in cash.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Maryland College Investment Plan (MCIP)
Finding 5
Maryland 529 did not ensure that the MCIP TPA assessed and remitted fees as required.
We recommend that STO establish procedures to ensure the MCIP TPA assesses and
remits all required fees.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any The current administration has implemented steps to ensure that the vendor
concerns with factual administering the Maryland College Investment Plan is providing
accuracy. breakdowns of the fees collected on its behalf.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/1/2025
Please provide details of Currently, the vendor sends a monthly breakdown of the MCIP fee by
corrective action or product. In the spreadsheet provided, funds are individually named, and
explain disagreement. subsequent associated average assets daily fee accrual are identified. The
state fee, program fee and other associated fees details are given as well.
The cash receipts are then recorded as revenue into MD529’s books and
reconciled on a monthly basis.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Thomas J. Kraemer
Nga T. Nguyen Simmons
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors