Title: Baltimore City Public Schools
Date: 02/20/2025
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67bdf11cf92602ccf3fe38c5
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:15:45.121563
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Baltimore City Public Schools
February 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 20, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Baltimore
City Public Schools (City Schools) in accordance with the requirements of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether City Schools’ procedures
and controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and
whether its policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that City Schools did not always comply with procurement
policies and maintain sufficient documentation related to disbursements. Overall,
we noted seven issues with procurement and disbursements. For example, City
Schools did not properly evaluate and document certain contract awards, and
certain contracts totaling $5.1 million appeared to have been improperly awarded.
Additionally, City Schools did not ensure vendor invoices were paid timely,
resulting in 16,632 invoices (12 percent) totaling $142 million being paid over 90
days after the invoice date during the period from July 1, 2021 to February 28,
2023. Furthermore, certain requirements of State law and recognized best
practices were not incorporated in City Schools’ procurement policies and were
not consistently used when obtaining goods and services under intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements.
Additionally, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our

--- Page 4 ---
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit also disclosed that City Schools needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in several areas, including transportation services, payroll
processing, annual disclosure statements, and health care services. For example,
an analysis of school police overtime was not performed and overtime was not
always pre-approved as required by its policy. Additionally, required screenings
were not always performed before hiring certain applicants for positions involving
direct contact with minors. Furthermore, City Schools did not pursue
reimbursement of $1.5 million in salary costs from third parties and did not audit
or adequately monitor the performance of vendors that provide health care claims
processing services.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 17 of the 20
findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings, we determined that City Schools satisfactorily addressed 6 of
those 12 findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report.
City Schools’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of City Schools’
response related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We have also edited City
Schools’ response to remove certain vendor names or products and links to
websites, as allowed by our policy.
We reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and
related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of the response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by City
Schools.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 10
External Audits 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 12
Findings and Recommendations 15
Revenue and Billing Cycle 15
Federal Funds 16
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – City Schools did not properly perform and document bid 18
evaluations resulting in a lack of assurance that contracts were
awarded to the appropriate vendors including at least two contracts
totaling $5.1 million that appeared to have been improperly awarded.
Finding 2 – City Schools did not monitor vendor invoices to ensure they 19
were paid timely. Our analysis of vendor payments from July 1, 2021
to February 28, 2023 disclosed that 16,632 invoices (12 percent)
totaling $142 million were paid 90 days or more after the invoice date
recorded on the City Schools’ financial management system.
∗ Finding 3 – City Schools did not obtain required supporting 21
documentation from vendors to verify the propriety of amounts
invoiced.
∗ Finding 4 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 22
practices were not incorporated into City Schools’ procurement
policies and were not consistently used when participating in
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
∗ Finding 5 – City Schools did not always prepare required written 24
justifications when procuring contracts using the sole source method
and did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA), as required.
Finding 6 – City Schools did not have adequate controls over vendor 25
bid submissions.
∗ Finding 7 – City Schools did not always prepare and approve purchase 26
orders prior to obtaining goods and services, as required.
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 8 – City Schools did not always perform a newly required 27
screening before hiring certain applicants for positions involving
direct contact with minors.
∗ Finding 9 – City Schools did not pursue collection of $1.5 million due 28
from third parties for services being provided by five City School
employees.
Finding 10 – City Schools did not adequately monitor and control police 29
overtime and did not always pre-approve overtime as required by its
existing policy.
Equipment Control and Accountability 30
Information Technology
Finding 11 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 31
Finding 12 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 31
Finding 13 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 31
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 31
Transportation Services
∗ Finding 14 – City Schools could not document its review and approval 36
of bus contractor invoices and did not to assess certain available
liquidated damages.
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 15 – City Schools paid bus contractors for van transportation 37
services that were not included in the bus contracts and without any
contract modifications or obtaining Board approval.
Food Services 38
School Board Oversight
Finding 16 – City Schools did not take appropriate follow-up action 39
when individuals did not file the required annual disclosure
statements.
Management of Other Risks
Finding 17 – City Schools did not obtain and review claims data or audit 42
healthcare activity from its third-party administrators.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 44
Agency Response Appendix
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), the Baltimore City Public School System
(City Schools) ranks 5th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems
in Maryland. Fiscal year 2022 full-time student enrollment was 77,807 students.
City Schools had 154 schools (including 31 charter schools and 4
contract/transformational schools), consisting of 44 elementary, 71
elementary/middle, 4 middle schools, 11 middle/high, and 24 high schools.
Funding
City Schools’ revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State,
Baltimore City, and federal government. According to City Schools’ audited
financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $1.9 billion
in fiscal year 2022, including $1.3 billion from the State. According to MSDE’s
records, the State funding included formula funding grants totaling $822 million,
capital projects totaling $323 million, Blueprint for Maryland’s Future grants
totaling $92 million, and State-share for employee pension payments totaling $63
million. See Figure 1 on the following page for City Schools’ funding by source
for the six-year period from fiscal year 2017 through fiscal year 2022. See Figure
2 (on page 8) for revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year 2022
according to its audited financial statements.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1
City Schools Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2017 through 2022
(dollar amounts in millions)
82,354
80,591
79,297
79,187
77,856
77,807
$1,205 $1,233 $1,345
$1,077 $1,124
$967
$275 $185 $286 $179 $296 $194 $302 $179 $309 $240 $282 $310
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Enrollment State Local Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2022 included:
• $822 million for Foundation Formula Grants
• $323 million for Capital Projects
• $92 million for Blueprint Grants
• $63 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
Source: City Schools’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
City Schools Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2022
Other
$291
1%
Local
$3,629
15%
Federal
$3,695
State
15%
$17,286
69%
Source: City Schools’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides additional
funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as Prekindergarten Aid).
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Expenditures
According to City Schools’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2022
expenditures were approximately $1.9 billion. The largest expenditure category
was salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 55
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2022. According to MSDE
records, during the 2021-2022 school year, City Schools had 9,779 full-time
equivalent positions, which consisted of 6,973 instructional and 2,806 non-
instructional positions. Instruction accounted for 43 percent of City Schools’
expenditures on a categorical basis (see Figure 3).2
Figure 3
City Schools Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2022
(amounts in millions)
$828.4
Instruction
43%
$503.5
Facilities & Capital Projects
26%
$260.2
Administration & Support
14% Enrollment
$225.7 77,807
Special Education
12%
$50.8 Employees
Food Service
3% 9,779
$48.4
Transportation
2% Cost Per Pupil
$24,639
Source: City Schools' Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
2 The percentage expended by City Schools on instruction in fiscal year 2022 (43 percent) was
lower than most local education agencies because City Schools expended $503.5 million (26
percent of the total fiscal year 2022 expenditures) on facilities and capital projects.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Oversight
City Schools is governed by a local school board, consisting of nine members
appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore, two elected members and one voting
student representative.3 MSDE exercises considerable oversight of City Schools
through the establishment and monitoring of various financial and academic
policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with City Schools to comply with the
requirements and mandates of federal law. The Baltimore City government also
exercises authority over City Schools primarily through the review and approval
of City Schools’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a 7-member Board
appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. The Board
Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker of the
House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, the Maryland State Department of Education, and the
Interagency Commission on School Construction. Specifically, the law provides
that the OIGE may receive and investigate information and complaints concerning
potential fraud, waste, and abuse of public funds and property; civil rights
violations involving students or employees; whether policies and procedures
governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with
applicable federal and State laws; and compliance with other applicable federal
and State laws.
3 The student member has the same rights and privileges as an elected member, and can vote on
and participate in all matters except those specifically prohibited by law, such as those relating to
personnel matters, capital and operating budgets, collective bargaining decisions, and student
discipline matters.
10

--- Page 13 ---
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
review, the OIGE issued nine public reports related to City Schools’ reviews and
investigations. We considered these reports during our current audit.
External Audits
As required by State law, City Schools engages a certified public accounting firm
to independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of City Schools as of June 30, 2017,
2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023, and the respective changes in its
financial position and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
City Schools’ control over financial reporting and its tests of City Schools’
compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant
agreements and other matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual
independently audited financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts
the Single Audit of City Schools’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is
intended to provide assurance to the federal government that adequate internal
controls are in place, and the entity is generally in compliance with program
requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2017 through 2022 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2022 audit, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the
following areas:
11

--- Page 14 ---
• State and local government revenues received via electronic funds transfer
• Accounts receivables
• Federal grant activity
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 17 of the 20
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated October 17, 2018. As
disclosed in Figure 4 on the following pages, for the non-cybersecurity related
findings, we determined that City Schools satisfactorily addressed 6 of these 12
findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
City Schools did not properly monitor or bill amounts owed by outside Repeated
Finding 1
organizations for the services of its employees. (Current Finding 9)
City Schools did not obtain social security numbers for 5,600 students with
Not repeated
Finding 2 individual education plans to help identify qualified students for whom Medicaid
(Not followed up on)
reimbursements could be obtained for eligible services.
City Schools did not have a formal process to review denied Medicaid claims in Not repeated
Finding 3
order to determine if the claims could be corrected for resubmission. (Not followed up on)
City Schools did not adequately restrict user access capabilities in its automated
Finding 4 Status Redacted4
procurement and accounts payable system.
City Schools did not document the appropriateness of using intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPAs) as required by State law.
Repeated
Finding 5 Additionally, City Schools did not obtain the original agreements from the initial
(Current Finding 4)
procuring entity so that payment rates could be verified nor did it obtain itemized
invoices for certain purchases it made under ICPA contracts.
City Schools did not document the basis for assigning work to pre-qualified
Finding 6 vendors for certain services and, in certain cases, higher priced vendors received Not repeated
work prior to lower cost vendors.
Purchase orders were not always prepared and approved as required prior to Repeated
Finding 7
obtaining the related goods or services. (Current Finding 7)
City Schools did not always adequately monitor contracts to ensure goods and Repeated
Finding 8
services were properly received or that invoices were proper prior to payment. (Current Finding 3)
City Schools did not always adequately document the rationale for sole source
Repeated
Finding 9 contract determinations and sole source contract awards were not always
(Current Finding 5)
published on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not independently
Finding 10 Not repeated
reviewed for propriety.
Certain overtime payments could not be substantiated or were improperly
Finding 11 Not repeated
calculated.
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by City Schools was
Finding 12 Status Redacted4
stored without adequate safeguards.
Proper account and password controls were not established over the ERP system,
ERP database logging did not exist for certain critical privileges and security-
Finding 13 Status Redacted4
related changes, and City Schools could not substantiate that security monitoring
was performed for its firewalls and the ERP system.
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage for the City Schools’ network had
Finding 14 substantial gaps, and malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide Status Redacted4
City Schools with adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
4 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
City Schools lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
Finding 15 operational controls existed over its student information system that was hosted, Status Redacted5
operated, and maintained by a service provider.
Contract and payment processing issues specific to the prior arrangement with
Repeated
Finding 16 private bus contractors contributed to transportation costs being higher than
(Current Finding 14)
necessary.
City Schools did not maintain documentation, including executed contracts, to
Finding 17 Not repeated
support certain financial relationships with bus contractors.
City Schools’ process for reviewing taxi company invoices did not adequately
Not repeated
Finding 18 ensure the billings were proper and that payments were consistent with contractual
(Not followed up on)
terms, resulting in overpayments totaling $1.2 million.
City Schools did not require charter school management personnel and board
Finding 19 members to periodically renew conflict of interest disclosures and did not ensure Not repeated
the disclosures were completed as required.
City Schools did not properly track and monitor required documents to be
Finding 20 submitted by each charter school nor did City Schools perform follow-up actions Not repeated
to obtain required documents from the schools.
5 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Baltimore City Public School System (City Schools) revenues consist primarily of
funds received from the State, Baltimore City, and the federal government.
According to City Schools’ audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled approximately $1.9 billion in fiscal year 2022; including $1.3
billion from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited City Schools’ financial statements and the
objectives of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this
work to provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received
via electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s
procedural reviews (related to the fiscal year 2022 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications.6 Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2022, school
activity collections totaled approximately $2.1 million and the June 30, 2022 fund
balance was $1.2 million. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of
this activity, we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area, including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
6 In accordance with Board policy, the school activity funds are intended to promote the general
welfare of students and to facilitate the normal extracurricular activities of the school.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Federal Funds
Background
City Schools receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to City Schools’ Single Audit, fiscal
year 2022 (latest available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled
approximately $275.3 million, not including federally funded fee-for-service
programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues increased,
from $166.2 million in fiscal year 2019 to $287.5 million in fiscal year 2022 (73
percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding. According to City Schools’
records, as of March 31, 2023, it was awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant
funds totaling $786.3 million to be distributed over federal fiscal years 2020 to
2025 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, Coronavirus
Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act, and American Rescue
Plan.7
As of March 31, 2023, City Schools’ expenditures related to these COVID-19
grants totaled $329.5 million, from March 2020 to March 2023, and were
primarily comprised of staffing, laptops, instructional software and materials,
personal protection equipment and sanitary supplies. City Schools can request
extensions until March 2026 from the federal grant programs for distributing any
funds not used by the end of the grant period (which was generally by the end of
federal fiscal year 2024). We were advised by City Schools that it plans to
request an extension to expend the remaining funds.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of City Schools’ federal grants and the objectives of
our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on City Schools’
compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered
the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the
required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed
and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2017 through 2023. Our review
7 In addition to the federal grants, City Schools was also awarded four local and private COVID-
19 grants totaling $5.2 million, all of which had been spent as of March 31, 2023. Specifically,
City Schools received a Baltimore City COVID-19 award of $3 million and private awards of
$1.5 million for technology and a private award of $739,000 for COVID testing. Local and
private grants are subject to review and testing during our audit.
16

--- Page 19 ---
of the Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in this
report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
City Schools has established a procedure to identify children eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an
entitlement program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to City
Schools. Medicaid activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in November 2022 of the results of its review of 15 student
case files for 50 criteria. The report did not specifically address the propriety of
Medicaid billing but overall concluded that City Schools was generally compliant
with most criteria. For example, City Schools was 100 percent compliant with 32
criteria and between 80 and 99 percent compliant with 11 criteria.
According to City Schools’ records, fiscal year 2023 State and federal
reimbursements for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $6.5
million, which was 21 percent higher than the previous fiscal year. Based on our
current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives, our
audit did not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in this area, including policies, procedures, and controls with respect
to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and City Schools’ records,
disbursements (excluding payroll) totaled $872 million during fiscal year 2022.
City Schools uses an automated financial management system for purchases and
disbursements. Requisitions are created in the system by departments and are
subject to online departmental and purchasing department approvals. Purchase
orders are prepared in the system by the purchasing department based on
approved requisitions. The purchasing department also generally handles the
solicitation, bid evaluation, and establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable department
(along with a duplicate invoice sent to the requesting department for certain types
17

--- Page 20 ---
of invoices) for entry into the financial management system. The system matches
invoices to appropriate purchasing documents and the verification of receipt
entered by the receiving school or department. Payments are processed by the
Finance Office through the automated system, which either prints vendor checks
or transfers the funds electronically, and then posts the payment to the financial
records.
City Schools has various written procurement policies, administrative regulations,
and guidance documents (hereinafter referred to as policies and regulations). City
Schools’ written procurement policies generally require that procurements
exceeding $50,000 be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the
Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and approved by the City
School’s Board.
Finding 1
City Schools did not properly perform and document bid evaluations
resulting in a lack of assurance that contracts were awarded to the
appropriate vendors including at least two contracts totaling $5.1 million
that appeared to have been improperly awarded.
Analysis
City Schools did not properly perform and document bid evaluations resulting in a
lack of assurance that contracts were awarded to the appropriate vendors. City
Schools’ procurement policy provided for the use of an evaluation committee to
evaluate proposals received in response to a request for proposals (RFP). Each
committee member was to complete a scoring sheet for every bid which were
consolidated on a bid evaluation summary for each contract. We reviewed four
competitively bid contract awards made in fiscal year 2022 totaling $9.4 million
for which both technical abilities and pricing were considered. The four contract
awards had 227 individual scoring sheets prepared by the bid evaluation
committee members. Our review disclosed the following conditions:
• Neither the individual evaluation committee member scoring sheets nor the
consolidated scores were signed by the evaluation committee members for any
of the contracts tested.
• City Schools did not evaluate the bids using the criteria specified in the RFP.
For example, the RFP for one contract specified that bids would be assessed
using weighted values ranging from 3 to 14 points. However, the evaluation
committee members scored each category without using the required weighted
point values.
18

--- Page 21 ---
• For 3 contact awards totaling $7 million, City Schools did not accurately enter
the individual evaluation committee member scoring sheets into the bid
evaluation summary. Specifically, 109 of 188 scoring sheets prepared by the
evaluation committee members were not accurately entered (for example,
wrong scores or rankings entered), and another 24 scoring sheets were not
recorded at all. In addition, for one contract award totaling $2.8 million, we
noted that five of the eight bidders were not included on the scoring summary
sheet. City Schools could not explain the inaccurate or omitted information.
Based on our review, at least 2 of the contract awards tested totaling $5.1 million
appeared to have been improperly awarded. For example, for one contract award
totaling $2.3 million, City Schools incorrectly calculated evaluation scores and
our recalculation of the scores disclosed that another vendor that bid $1.9 million
($400,000 less) should have been awarded the contract. City Schools
acknowledged that it had made an error when calculating the evaluation scoring
for these vendors.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that City Schools properly perform and document bid
evaluations to support contract award decisions. Specifically, City Schools
should
a. ensure individual evaluation committee member scoring sheets are
properly completed, signed, summarized, and retained;
b. complete bid evaluations in accordance with the method specified in the
contract solicitation to ensure contracts are properly evaluated; and
c. reevaluate its prior contract award decisions, including those noted
above, to determine if bid evaluations properly supported the award and
consult with legal counsel regarding necessary corrective actions for any
contracts that were not properly awarded.
Finding 2
City Schools did not monitor vendor invoices to ensure they were paid
timely. Our analysis of vendor payments from July 1, 2021 to February 28,
2023 disclosed that 16,632 invoices (12 percent) totaling $142 million were
paid 90 days or more after the invoice date recorded on the City Schools’
financial management system.
Analysis
City Schools did not monitor vendor invoices to ensure they were paid in a timely
manner (within 30 days) as required by its policy. Specifically, it did not have a
centralized process to track and monitor the timeliness of invoice payments.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Further, it did not generate a report from its automated financial management
system to identify and follow up on invoices that remained unpaid for over 30
days after being recorded.
Our Data Analytics Unit performed an analysis of vendor payments totaling $1.1
billion that City Schools processed during the period from July 1, 2021 to
February 28, 2023. The analysis disclosed that 16,632 invoices (12 percent)
totaling $142.3 million were paid 90 days or more after the invoice date recorded
in the financial management system. See Figure 5 for a breakdown of the
timeliness of processing vendor invoices for payment for the period from July 1,
2021 to February 28, 2023.
Figure 5
Timeliness of Processing Invoice Payments
July 1, 2021 to February 28, 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
Date Range of Number
Amount of
Payment after Percentage of Percentage
Invoices
Invoice Date Invoices
less than 30 days $564.6 51% 47,970 34%
30 days to 89 days 400.6 36% 74,611 54%
90 days and over 142.3 13% 16,632 12%
Total $1,107.5 100% 139,213 100%
Source: City Schools’ Financial Management System
We tested 21 invoice payments totaling $4 million that were made 123 to 1,382
days after the date of the vendor’s invoice recorded in the system to determine the
cause of the delays. City Schools advised that the majority of the delays were
caused by employee staffing issues or improper routing of the invoices for
payment. For example, City Schools advised us that one invoice totaling
$942,000 for a summer arts and learning program recorded as being received on
August 30, 2022 was not paid until January 18, 2023 because the employee
assigned to process it was on leave and a different employee was not assigned to
process the payment. City Schools advised us that another invoice totaling
$198,000 for portable cooling units for classrooms, recorded as being received on
September 22, 2022, was not paid until January 23, 2023 because it was routed to
the wrong department.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that City Schools establish a centralized monitoring process
to ensure that invoices are date stamped when received and paid timely.
Finding 3
City Schools did not obtain required supporting documentation from
vendors to verify the propriety of amounts invoiced.
Analysis
City Schools did not obtain required supporting documentation from vendors to
verify amounts invoiced. Our test of 9 invoices8 totaling $5.1 million paid from
November 2019 through January 2023, disclosed that 3 invoices totaling
$453,000 did not include certain details required by the related contracts. For
example, City Schools paid a $317,332 invoice for student program activities
(such as yoga, sound therapy, and social and emotional learning practices)
without obtaining any documentation of the students that participated or attended.
The contract stated the vendor would be paid an established rate for services
actually provided to students that participated or attended. Based on our request,
City Schools obtained support from the vendors for the aforementioned 3 invoices
which supported the amounts invoiced and paid. According to City Schools’
records, as of February 28, 2023, these vendors had received payments totaling
approximately $8.1 million on the 3 contracts tested.
Similar conditions regarding the inadequate support for amounts invoiced were
noted in our two preceding audit reports dating back to September 2012. In its
response to our preceding audit report, City Schools stated it would disseminate
information to its employees regarding compliance with invoice processing
requirements and it would monitor contract purchasing and receiving activity.
However, City Schools did not effectively implement these corrective actions as
employees did not require vendors to provide the supporting documentation to
enable the confirmation that amounts invoiced were proper.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that City Schools obtain required supporting documentation
from vendors for invoices (repeat).
8 Invoices were selected for testing based on the significance of the related contracts and the
process utilized to procure them.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 4
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into City Schools’ procurement policies and were not
consistently used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPAs).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated in City Schools’ procurement policies and were not consistently used
when participating in ICPAs. State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland
General Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies, allows the
use of ICPAs only after the using entity has met the statutory requirement of
determining (or assessing) in writing that the use of such arrangements will
provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or promote
intergovernmental cooperation.9
According to its records, City Schools used the ICPA procurement method for
136 procurements with awards totaling $266.8 million during the period from
June 2018 through January 2023. Our review of City Schools’ procurement
policies disclosed that the above statutory requirement as well as the following
critical best practices were not included:
• Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
• Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs;
• Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties;
• Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly advertised.
• Obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation
(including public advertisements and proposal evaluations);
• Verify terms, scope of services, specifications, and price meet our needs;
• Execute an addendum of participation with the lead contract agency and
remove or incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
• Obtain a copy of the ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification.
9 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5-112(a)(3) of the Education Article of the Code, provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
22

--- Page 25 ---
In addition, we tested City Schools’ participation in 6 ICPAs (selected based on
significance), awarded during fiscal years 2019 to 2023, totaling approximately
$58 million. Our review disclosed that City Schools did not include some of the
aforementioned best practices in the ICPAs tested. For example, City Schools did
not analyze the costs of conducting competitive solicitations or research, compare,
and evaluate other available ICPAs for any of the ICPAs tested. We further noted
that City Schools had not prepared the statutorily required written assessments for
any of the contracts tested to justify the use of the ICPA. Incorporating ICPA best
practices into City Schools’ procurement policies could help ensure they are
consistently used.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, City Schools stated it would implement a checklist to
ensure ICPA requirements and best practices were followed. During our current
audit we noted that City Schools had created an ICPA checklist that included
some of the aforementioned best practices, but the checklist was not being used.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, the practices also require that ICPA users ensure that the contract was
awarded through a competitive procurement process, that addendums be executed
documenting their participation, and that all local required terms and conditions
are incorporated.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that City Schools incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs (repeat).
23

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 5
City Schools did not always prepare required written justifications when
procuring contracts using the sole source method and did not always publish
contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA), as required.
Analysis
City Schools did not always prepare required written justifications when
procuring contracts using the sole source method and did not always publish
contract awards on eMMA,10 as required. City Schools’ policies and regulations
allow for sole source contracts when it is determined that only one vendor can
provide the goods or services, it is in its best interest to award a contract without a
competitive solicitation, the contract is for an emergency, or the contract requires
confidentiality in connection with actual or potential litigation. During fiscal
years 2020 and 2021, City Schools awarded sole source contracts totaling $269
million.
Our arbitrary test of five of these sole source contracts (one for a teacher
certification program, one for fuel, and three for software), totaling $8.2 million,
approved by the Board in fiscal years 2020 and 2021, disclosed the following
conditions:
• City Schools did not prepare comprehensive sole source justification forms for
all five contracts tested. City Schools’ policies and procedures require written
comprehensive sole source contract determinations to be provided to the
Board when requesting approval that include details about the unique skills of
the vendor proposed for award and the investigation performed to confirm that
information. Although written explanations of the necessity of each of the
contracts were included in the agenda for Board meetings, in our opinion the
explanations lacked specificity to justify that the selected vendor was the only
suitable or acceptable option to provide the services. For example, one vendor
provided teacher recruitment and training in general and special education, but
City Schools did not have documentation that other vendors could not provide
the services or an explanation of what investigation was performed to make
that determination.
• City Schools did not publish or did not timely publish three of the five sole
source contract awards on eMMA’ as required by State procurement
regulations. State procurement regulations require local school systems to
publish sole source contract awards valued at $50,000 or more on eMMA not
10 eMMA is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
24

--- Page 27 ---
more than 30 days after the approval of the contract. Our review disclosed
that one contract was not published and two were published on eMMA
approximately 19 months to 2.5 years after the contracts were awarded.
Publishing awards on eMMA provides transparency over procurements
including information about the winning bidder and the amount of the related
award.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. In response to that
report, City Schools stated that it would include justification of the rationale for
using the sole source in the letter submitted before each Board meeting and that it
published guidance on posting solicitations and awards to eMMA. However, as
noted above, the justifications provided were not comprehensive and the guidance
provided was not sufficient to ensure awards were published as required.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that City Schools
a. ensure that sole source contract justifications are prepared as required
and include appropriate information to document the rationale for not
performing a competitive procurement (repeat), and
b. publish sole source contract awards on eMMA, as required (repeat),
including the contract award noted above.
Finding 6
City Schools did not have adequate controls over vendor bid submissions.
Analysis
City Schools did not have adequate controls over vendor bid submissions.
Specifically, City Schools instructed vendors to submit bids by email but did not
require the bid submissions to be password protected. Consequently, bids could
be opened without detection prior to the formal bid opening and confidential
competitive bid information could be accessed and disclosed without detection to
other prospective bidders prior to the bid due date.
City Schools’ procurement policies and State procurement regulations require that
vendor bid proposals are to be held in a secure place until the established due
date. During fiscal year 2022, City Schools awarded contracts totaling $234
million using a competitive procurement process and City Schools advised us that
bid proposals for most of these contracts were submitted electronically.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that City Schools ensure all vendor bid proposals submitted
are adequately secured prior to opening.
Finding 7
City Schools did not always prepare and approve purchase orders prior to
obtaining goods or services, as required.
Analysis
City Schools did not always prepare and approve purchase orders prior to
obtaining the related goods or services, as required by its procurement policy.
Specifically, our analysis of City Schools’ records during the six-year period from
fiscal years 2017 to 2022 disclosed it retroactively processed 16,298 purchase
orders totaling $76.5 million after the goods and services had been ordered,
received, and paid for. For example, one invoice totaling $3.4 million for a
hotspot service for virtual learning was dated 32 days prior to the creation of the
purchase order and another invoice totaling $143,000 for international educational
standards exams was dated 108 days prior to the purchase order.
City Schools’ procurement policy requires purchase orders to be prepared and
independently approved prior to purchasing goods and services. City Schools’
automated system for purchases and disbursements electronically matches vendor
invoices to an established purchase order. When a vendor invoice does not have
an established purchase order, the automated system controls prevent the invoice
from being paid. Consequently, the Finance Office has to manually confirm the
accuracy of the invoice with the department or school that obtained the goods and
services and retroactively process a purchase order in order to process the invoice
for payment.
A similar condition was noted in our preceding audit report. In response to that
report, City Schools stated that beginning in January 2019, it would provide
reports to allow systemic review and appropriate follow-up action. City Schools’
Finance Office monitors for instances of invoices received without a
corresponding purchase order and generally sends monthly notifications advising
each department and school of the problematic nature of this activity. Although
City Schools implemented the reporting process, it has not been effective to
sufficiently reduce this practice.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that City Schools ensure that procurement policies and
automated system controls are not bypassed by ensuring purchase orders are
prepared and approved prior to obtaining the related goods or services
(repeat).
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the City Schools’
budget. According to City Schools’ records, fiscal year 2022 salary, wage, and
benefit costs totaled approximately $1 billion, representing 55 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2021-2022 school year City Schools had 9,779 full-time positions,
which consisted of 6,973 instructional and 2,806 non-instructional positions.
City Schools uses automated systems to maintain human resources information,
record employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record
payroll transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit
advices. Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as
compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data
entry of new employee information).
Finding 8
City Schools did not always perform a newly required screening before
hiring certain applicants for positions involving direct contact with minors.
Analysis
City Schools did not always perform a newly required screening before hiring
certain applicants for positions involving direct contact with minors (such as,
care, supervision, guidance, control, or routine interaction). State law effective
July 1, 2019 (and updated July 1, 2021) requires local education agencies to
provide screening of certain applicants. Specifically, the schools must obtain
information from an applicant for positions that involve direct contact with a
minor including a written statement whether they were the subject of a child
sexual abuse or sexual misconduct investigation by any employer that resulted in
a finding.11 The law also requires local education agencies to contact the
applicant’s current or prior employers and obtain the same information.
11 This is in addition to existing requirements to obtain a criminal background check.
27

--- Page 30 ---
According to City Schools’ records, during fiscal year 2022, City Schools hired
1,550 individuals that were assigned to schools or student programs that would
have contact with minors. We arbitrarily tested 12 employees hired during fiscal
year 2022 and 2023 (after the aforementioned law) with direct contact with
minors and noted that City Schools had not performed the screenings for 7 of the
employees as of October 23, 2023 (296 to 436 days after the date of hire). For 3
employees, the screening documents were dated after our inquiries (425 to 768
days after the date of hire). Without a proper screening, City Schools lacks
assurance that the individuals hired were not precluded from having direct contact
with minors.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that City Schools perform and document the required
screening for positions involving direct contact with minors, including those
noted above, in compliance with State law.
Finding 9
City Schools did not pursue collection of $1.5 million due from third parties
for services being provided by five City School employees.
Analysis
City Schools did not pursue collection of $1.5 million due from third parties for
services being provided by five City School employees. City Schools authorizes
temporary paid leave of absence for certain employees to provide services to
outside organizations (such as education related employee unions and non-
profits). In certain cases, such as for employee unions, the salaries and fringe
benefits paid by City Schools for employees granted a paid leave of absence to
work for outside organizations is to be reimbursed by those organizations in
accordance with existing agreements. City Schools’ personnel advised that it had
not set up a process to regularly bill for these services.
According to City Schools’ records, there were 14 employees granted a paid leave
of absence to work for outside organizations for fiscal year 2023. Based on the
applicable agreements, City Schools was to be reimbursed for six of these
employees. Our test disclosed that City Schools had only billed and received
reimbursements totaling $194,000 for one of the six employees but did not
attempt to recover $1.5 million due for the other five employees, including
$963,000 for two employees due as far back as fiscal year 2020. Based on our
inquiries, City Schools billed and collected the $1.5 million due for the five
employees.
28

--- Page 31 ---
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to September 2012. In response to our preceding audit report, City
Schools indicated that appropriate collection efforts would be made. However, as
indicated above, City Schools did not have an adequate process to bill and collect
for employees working for outside organizations.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that City Schools take appropriate action to ensure
appropriate and timely billing and collection efforts are made for amounts
owed by outside organizations (repeat).
Finding 10
City Schools did not adequately monitor and control police overtime, and did
not always pre-approve overtime as required by its existing policy.
Analysis
City Schools did not adequately monitor and control police overtime, and did not
always pre-approve overtime as required by its existing policy. According to City
Schools’ records, during fiscal year 2022, it paid 40,078 overtime hours totaling
$2.1 million to 82 police officers.
City Schools Did Not Analyze Overtime Usage
City Schools had not performed an analysis of overtime hours for police work
shifts to ensure that overtime Figure 6
hours worked were not
Summary of Overtime Hours Paid to Officers
excessive and were consistent
Fiscal Year 2022
with its policies. We obtained
City School police overtime Range of Total
Number of Overtime
Overtime Overtime
records for fiscal year 2022 Officers Hours Paid
Hours Earnings
and based on our analysis,
1,500 or more 1 1,647 $94,710
most of the overtime hours
(78 percent) were worked by 1,000 to 1,499 9 37 10,391 565,003
37 officers (see Figure 6). 500 to 999 27 19,079 995,817
0 to 499 45 8,962 454,366
Total 82 40,078 $2,109,896
Source: City Schools’ records
Overtime Policy Did Not Limit Overtime Worked
City School’s Overtime Policy did not establish a limit on the number of overtime
hours that could be worked during a given period. Specifically, the policy only
states that “overtime shall be limited so that effective performance of duty of any
29

--- Page 32 ---
police officer may not become impaired” without providing maximum limits on
overtime. Based on our research, certain other local police organizations
established criteria that includes limits on overtime and secondary employment
hours worked by officers. For example, the Baltimore City Police Department
had a policy stipulating that employees can only work 32 hours of voluntary
overtime per week. We noted that 5 of the 9 officers tested worked more than 32
hours in a week during the pay periods we reviewed.
Overtime Was Not Always Pre-approved as Required
Our test of overtime disclosed that the overtime was not pre-approved as required.
We tested overtime hours charged for one pay period for 9 of the 10 officers that
had 1,000 or more overtime hours in fiscal year 2022. Our test disclosed that for
7 of the 9 officers, 128 of the 481 hours of overtime totaling $7,150 were not
approved in advance as required.
City Schools’ policy requires a written request, prior to the overtime, that includes
the conditions requiring the overtime, number of officers needed, the hours
requested and date of the request. The overtime must be approved in advance by
the authorizing supervisor requesting the overtime and by the on-duty officer after
the work is completed. The officer in charge of the overtime unit and scheduling
was indicted in September 2023 by the United States Attorney for the District of
Maryland for allegations related to fraudulently obtaining overtime earnings while
working for City Schools’ police department.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that City Schools
a. analyze police overtime usage to ensure that it is not excessive and is
consistent with its policies;
b. establish maximum limits on overtime and secondary employment hours
worked by an officer to ensure the extra work does not impact their
performance; and
c. ensure overtime is pre-approved as required by its policy.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to City Schools’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value
of its capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, and equipment) totaled
$67.5 million as of June 30, 2022. City Schools maintains centralized automated
records for all equipment with a cost of $5,000 or more that are capitalized for
financial statement purposes. Control and recordkeeping of laptop computers
30

--- Page 33 ---
assigned to schools was maintained in a database by the Information Technology
Office. City Schools has established written equipment policies and generally
performs inventories at each school every year of all sensitive equipment.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 11
through 13 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with City Schools’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
City Schools employs a staff of 532 employees to maintain its 154 schools
(including charter, special education and alternative) and a number of other
facilities (such as administrative and support offices). According to City Schools’
fiscal year 2024 Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to City Schools’ facilities over the next
31

--- Page 34 ---
six years are estimated to cost $809 million (this amount does not include the
projects under the 21st Century School Buildings Program noted below).
City Schools’ Capital Projects Were Competitively Procured and Approved
by the Board and Related Expenditures Were Properly Supported
Our review of eight construction-related procurements awarded based on price
only during fiscal years 2020 to 2023 totaling $71.7 million, disclosed that the
contracts were competitively procured and approved by the Board. In addition,
our test of 15 invoices totaling approximately $6 million (including 3 invoices
totaling $649,000 related to one of the eight contracts) disclosed that they were
properly supported and generally in accordance with contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
City Schools has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and
minimize energy costs. For example, City Schools provides scheduled
maintenance of its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing
emergency repairs. In addition, City Schools participates in a cooperative with
other Baltimore area entities to purchase energy at the best possible terms for
members of the cooperative. City Schools also utilizes a vendor energy
management program to monitor and control heating and air conditioning usage
and a utility bill management program to monitor related costs.
City Schools has written policies that include best practices that encourage both
students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use and monitors
building energy efficiency. Further, City Schools makes limited use of solar and
geothermal alternative energy sources. According to cooperative reports (which
we did not audit), City Schools saved approximately $25.9 million through energy
cost avoidance from fiscal years 2007 to 2022.
21st Century School Buildings Program
In 2013, the Maryland General Assembly passed the Baltimore City Public
Schools Construction and Revitalization Act. This Act created the 21st Century
School Buildings Program (the Program) that authorized the Maryland Stadium
Authority (MSA) to leverage $60 million per year to provide approximately $1.1
billion in bond proceeds for school renovation or replacement projects. A
memorandum of understanding, approved by the Maryland Board of Public
Works on October 16, 2013, outlines each party's roles and responsibilities in the
multi-faceted project. Ultimately, MSA finances, procures, constructs, and self-
certifies the building projects, and also reimburses City Schools for administrative
and operational expenses related to the Program.
32

--- Page 35 ---
The original goal of the Program was to deliver a projected 23 to 28 replacement
and/or renovated schools by 2020. According to MSA’s 2022 annual Program
report, due to efficient project management and innovative financial transactions
on the bond issuances, the renovation of another school building was added to the
Program in 2022. As of January 15, 2023, City Schools anticipate that this
Program will deliver 29 replacement and/or renovated school buildings by 2026.
The 29 school buildings will house 34 schools since five of the buildings contain
more than one school (such as elementary and middle schools). According to the
Program’s 2022 annual report, 26 school buildings housing 30 schools have been
completed, along with one under construction, one in the design phase, and one in
the procurement study phase. As of January 15, 2023, the Program expenditures
were $1.5 billion, including approximately $1.17 billion in construction related
procurement awards.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of City Schools’ internal control over the facilities construction, maintenance, and
energy management financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit
also did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable
laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics maintained by City Schools and/or compiled by the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), approximately 44,891 of the
77,807 students enrolled (58 percent) for school year 2022 were eligible to
receive student transportation services. Approximately 86 percent of students
(38,716 of the 44,891) eligible to receive student transportation services were
transported via public transportation services through the Maryland Transit
Administration (MTA) funded primarily by the Baltimore City local government.
The remaining 5,931 students eligible to receive student transportation were
transported over 1 million route miles during the 2022 school year via 180
contractor-owned buses, 53 contractor-owned vans, 34 system-owned buses, and
17 system-owned vans. 12 There were also approximately 244 students
transported by taxicabs (related route miles were not available).
According to City Schools’ financial records, school year 2022 transportation
costs totaled approximately $43.1 million (See Figure 7 on the following page).
12 City Schools has automated routing software for bus operations.
33

--- Page 36 ---
The transportation costs included $23.3 million for school buses and vans
operated by private contractors generally for transporting special needs children to
their appropriate school, and $6.1 million for System-owned school buses and
vans (operated by City Schools’ employees) used primarily to transport certain
disabled students. Additionally, City Schools expended $12.1 million for
administrative costs (such as, transportation department employee salaries and
benefits, and insurance) and $1.2 million for taxicabs primarily for special need
and homeless students.
As noted in Figure 7, a majority (54 percent) of City Schools’ transportation
expenditures were for bus contractors that transported only 12 percent of the
students eligible to receive transportation services.
Figure 7
Transportation Expenditures and Students Transported During
School Year 2021-2022
(dollar amounts in millions)
Type of Transportation Students
Expenditures
Expenditure Transported
Private Bus Contractors and Vans $23.3 54% 5,624 12%
City Schools' Owned Buses and Vans 6.1 14% 307 1%
Taxi 1.2 3% 244 1%
MTA* 0.4 1% 38,716 86%
Administrative Costs and Other 12.1 28% - -
Total $43.1 100% 44,891 100%
* Baltimore City local government primarily funds the cost of providing MTA transportation
which is paid directly to MTA and not included in City Schools’ budget.
Source: City Schools’ and MSDE records
Contracts for Bus Transportation
During school year 2021-2022, City Schools had contracts with 10 bus
contractors for student transportation. The contracts have a five-year term, which
began with the 2018-2019 school year. Contracts are not automatically renewed
and are subject to the Board’s right to terminate the contract for various reasons
(such as, available funding, cause, discretionary route reductions).
34

--- Page 37 ---
When City schools were closed between March 17, 2020 to August 30, 2021 due
to the COVID-19 pandemic, bus contractors were paid at modified contract rates.
The Board approved two amendments to the bus contracts in April 2020 and
January 2021 that allowed City Schools, like many other LEAs, to continue to pay
the bus contractors (initially at a universal reduced flat daily rate amount and then
at a vendor-specific 75 percent of estimated route amount) when services were not
needed in order to provide financial support and ensure it had school buses
available to transport students to in-person learning opportunities.
Electric Bus Lease Agreement
In February 2023, City Schools entered into a 12-year lease (with a 3-year
extension option) to replace 25 of their diesel school buses with 25 electric school
buses at a cost of $13.7 million. City Schools estimated the buses and related
infrastructure to be operating by January 2024. The lease was procured under an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA) competitively
procured by another Maryland local education agency and approved by the City
Schools’ Board. Our review of the lease agreement determined that it was an
acceptable use of an ICPA.13
According to the lease agreement, the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) is to award City Schools $8.9 million for the 25 buses and
$500,000 towards infrastructure costs, both of which are to be paid to the vendor.
The vendor will own the buses and infrastructure, which will be maintained by the
vendor and made available to City Schools. City Schools will be responsible for
the remaining $4.3 million to be paid out over the 12-year lease period.
Investigative Audit of City Schools’ Taxicab Services
During our preceding audit, we noted that taxicab vendors were being paid
incorrect reimbursement rates and that payments were not always supported by
ride vouchers, resulting in overpayments totaling $1.2 million. City Schools
agreed with our finding and established a promissory note with the main vendor
to collect $1.1 million of the overpayments.
In March 2023, the Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Education
(OIGE) issued an investigative audit report on City Schools’ student taxicab
transportation services for school years 2018–2019 through 2021-2022.
13 The vendor and the other Maryland local education agency (LEA) were the subject of a July
2024 audit by the County’s inspector general based on the late delivery of buses scheduled for
fiscal years 2022 to 2025 and a lack of contract provisions to protect the interests of the LEA.
Additionally, the buses had mechanical failures that rendered them inoperable for extended
periods. The audit identified that the LEA had to acquire diesel buses to compensate for not
receiving the anticipated electric buses from the vendor and the LEA should have assessed
liquidated damages totaling approximately $372,000.
35

--- Page 38 ---
According to the report, the OIGE initiated the review after it received a
complaint in February 2022 that a taxicab vendor was billing City Schools for
student transportation services that were not provided. The stated objective of the
OIGE audit was to determine whether taxicab vendors are complying with all
contractual and relevant state requirements while transporting students. At the
time of the OIGE investigation, City Schools had contracts with four taxicab
companies to provide transportation to students.
The OIGE report identified four findings and made several recommendations.
For example, the OIGE compared monthly invoices to monthly attendance
records and found over 3,900 instances where a vendor invoiced for rides that
exceeded the students’ recorded attendance. In some cases, the student had
transferred, withdrawn or graduated before the date of the ride billed. In total, the
OIGE identified charges totaling $631,000 for 1,115 students that were not
supported by attendance records.
The OIGE also determined that City Schools’ Finance Office was not monitoring
the collection of the aforementioned $1.1 million promissory note. The taxicab
company had stopped paying on the promissory note at the end of the 2019-2020
school year. According to the OIGE report, the outstanding balance as of
February 10, 2023 totaled $479,000. City Schools was generally in agreement
with the findings and recommendations and resumed pursuing collection from the
taxicab company after the issuance of the OIGE report.
Finding 14
City Schools could not document its review and approval of bus contractor
invoices and did not assess certain available liquidated damages.
Analysis
City Schools could not document its review and approval of bus contractor
invoices and its decision not to assess available liquidated damages.
• City Schools could not document that it verified the accuracy of contractor
invoices, which totaled approximately $94 million during school years 2019
to 2022. Specifically, City Schools could not provide documentation of its
review of monthly bus contract invoice calculations, and approval of related
payments for any invoices prior to August 2022. We were advised by
Transportation personnel that the invoice review process was reassigned to a
different employee in August 2022, and it could not locate documentation of
the reviews prior to that date.
36

--- Page 39 ---
• City Schools did not assess available liquidated damages for non-operational
GPS units. Our review of a system report that listed each GPS unit and its
operational status disclosed that during school year 2021-2022, at least 75
buses did not have operational GPS units for at least 50 percent of the school
year. The bus contracts provide for the assessment of liquidated damages
equal to the entire route amount for failure to install, maintain and use GPS
units and provide City Schools access to GPS data. Based on our estimates,
liquidated damages totaling $8.3 million could have been assessed during
fiscal year 2022 for bus contractors that did not install, use, and maintain GPS
units on buses as required by the respective bus contracts.
City Schools also did not always assess liquidated damages for other
violations of contract terms. Specifically, our testing identified 6 invoices
totaling $2.5 million where City Schools only assessed $5,000 of $96,000 in
available liquidated damages as provided for in its bus contracts for the
vendor’s use of uncertified drivers (4 instances), uncertified aides (3
instances), or operating uncertified buses (3 instances). City Schools could
not document why the available liquidated damages were not assessed.
A similar condition regarding the verification of amounts invoiced was
commented upon in our prior audit report. In response to that report, City Schools
indicated that it agreed with our recommendation and had put in place procedures
to ensure the propriety of contractor billings. However, as noted above, City
Schools did not implement sufficient procedures to ensure the amounts invoiced
were proper.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that City Schools
a. conduct documented verifications of amounts invoiced (repeat); and
b. assess all available liquidated damages when vendors do not comply with
the terms of applicable contracts, including for those instances noted
above.
Finding 15
City Schools paid bus contractors for van transportation services that were
not included in the bus contracts and without any contract modifications or
obtaining Board approval.
Analysis
City Schools paid bus contractors for van transportation services that were not
included in the bus contracts and without any contract modifications or obtaining
37

--- Page 40 ---
Board approval. City Schools could also not readily support or justify the
contractor daily flat rates for the van service paid which ranged from $467 to
$543 and were similar to rates paid for bus transportation. State law, effective
July 1, 2021, authorized all county school systems to utilize additional types of
vehicles to transport students to and from schools, including vans. Beginning
with the 2021-2022 school year, City Schools purchased vans and paid four of the
ten bus contractors to transport students in vans. While City Schools’
procurement policies require that modifications to contracts of $100,000 or more
obtain approval of the Board, no formal modifications were executed and
approval was not obtained. According to City Schools’ records, during school
year 2022-2023, the four bus contractors used 50 vans to transport students at an
estimated cost of $3.2 million.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that City Schools process formal contract modifications for
changes to the scope of the bus contracts, including those noted above.
Food Services
Background
According to City Schools’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $48 million in fiscal year 2022 and were primarily funded
with federal funds totaling $54 million. The federal funds are received from the
United States Department of Agriculture based on an established rate per meals
served. City Schools is allowed to retain federal funds it receives in excess of its
annual food service operating costs to be used to offset future food service
operating costs. According to City Schools’ audited financial statements, the
balance in City Schools’ Food Service Fund totaled $8.3 million as of June 30,
2022. According to MSDE records, in fiscal year 2022, City Schools had 293
food services positions for its 154 schools, consisting of 286 cafeteria positions
and 7 administrative positions.
Similar to other Maryland local education agencies, City Schools continued to
serve meals from certain schools during the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis by
providing free meals for parents and students to pick up. The number of meals
increased by 9.1 percent from 11 million in fiscal year 2020 to 12 million in fiscal
year 2023. City Schools advised us that the number of meals increased because
students were allowed back to school in-person after the COVID-19 pandemic
and that no employees were laid off due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to the Food Services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners (the Board) is composed of
nine members appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore, two elected members and
one voting student representative. The Board contracted with a certified public
accounting firm to conduct independent audits of City Schools’ financial
statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight of various areas of
City Schools’ operation and governance, the Board has established several
committees, such as an Audit Committee, Operations Committee, and an Ethics
Panel. In accordance with State law, a Parent and Community Advisory Board
has been established, which meets routinely in an open forum to hear public
concerns and advise how parents, families, the community, and educators can
collaborate to help youth succeed. The City Schools’ Board and Chief Executive
Officer are required to regularly consult with the Advisory Board.
City Schools Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that is applicable to both Board
members and City Schools’ employees and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees. In
accordance with the policy, City Schools established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations.
Finding 16
City Schools did not take appropriate follow-up action when individuals did
not file the required annual disclosure statements.
Analysis
City Schools did not take appropriate follow-up action when individuals did not
file the required annual disclosure statements. In accordance with City Schools’
ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, the Superintendent and other administrators (such as supervisors,
school principals, and agency buyers) by March 31st of each year. According to
City Schools’ records, 707 individuals were required to file in calendar year 2022.
39

--- Page 42 ---
Our review disclosed that City Schools did not follow up when individuals did not
file. Based on our review of City Schools’ records of required filers for the
calendar year 2022 filing period, 73 individuals (or approximately 10 percent) had
not filed the required statement as of July 2023 including, directors, assistant
principals, principals, and supervisors. City Schools could not document that
reminder letters were sent or any actions were taken to obtain the missing
disclosure forms. In response to our inquiries City Schools advised that it
determined that 26 of the 73 individuals did not have to file since they had either
been terminated or had changed positions and that it referred the remaining 47
individuals to the Board’s Ethics Panel in December 2023.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that City Schools
a. ensure that all applicable individuals file the required annual disclosure
statements; and
b. take appropriate documented follow-up action when individuals do not
file as required, including those noted above.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
City Schools is self-insured for its preferred provider network (PPN) and point of
services (POS) medical plans and is fully insured for its health maintenance
organization health plan. City Schools contracts with four third-party
administrator firms (TPAs) for
Figure 8
health care claims processing
City Schools’ Healthcare Financing
services14 for employee medical,
Calendar Year 2022
prescription, dental, and vision
costs. City Schools also contracts (amounts in millions)
Revenues
with a consultant to help manage
Employer Contributions $139.2
the health plans. The consultant
performs data analysis of health Employee Contributions 18.9
services utilization and costs, Rebates 7.8
provides recommendations on Total Revenue $165.9
potential rate changes, and
Expenditures
evaluates the merits of health plan
Claims Payments $146.4
proposals.
Health Insurance Premiums 7.8
According to City Schools’ Administrative Fees 3.7
records, the healthcare revenues Total Expenditures $157.9
and expenditures for calendar year
2022 totaled $165.9 million and
Source: City Schools’ records
$157.9 million, respectively (see
Figure 8).
As of June 30, 2023, City Schools provided health insurance benefits to
approximately 18,800 enrolled employees and dependents.15
14 City Schools has one TPA for the claims of the preferred provider and point of service medical
and dental plans, and separate TPAs for the claims of the health management organizations
medical, prescriptions, and vision plans.
15 Retiree health care cost is not reported by City Schools because Baltimore City government
provides other postemployment benefits to qualified City Schools’ retirees, and all related
retirement plan costs are the responsibility of Baltimore City government. According to City
Schools’ records, the City of Baltimore pass-through expenditures for retirees’ healthcare
benefits totaled approximately $11.8 million in calendar year 2022.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Finding 17
City Schools did not obtain and review claim data or audit healthcare
activity from its third-party administrators.
Analysis
City Schools did not obtain and review claim data or audit healthcare activity, or
otherwise monitor the performance of its third-party administrators (TPAs).
• City Schools did not obtain and review claim data to support the amounts
billed by the TPAs for healthcare claims. Specifically, City Schools approved
the amounts invoiced based on a high-level summary schedule of total claims
paid for each health plan. It did not request or obtain a list of claims paid by
enrolled employees and dependents to ensure it was only billed for eligible
plan participants.
• City Schools did not obtain audits of healthcare claims paid by the TPAs to
ensure that the billed services were actually provided to participants, were
covered by the health plans, that amounts paid were proper, that all available
drug rebates were obtained from drug manufacturers, and that self-reported
performance measures were supported and accurate. City Schools’ TPA
contracts allowed it to procure periodic independent third-party audits of the
accuracy and validity of claim reimbursements paid by City Schools. Our
review disclosed that City Schools did not obtain audits of claims paid by the
TPAs for the HMO, pharmacy, vision, and dental plans during the period
under review and the most recent audit of claims paid by the TPA for the PPO
and POS medical plans was for fiscal year 2017.
• City Schools did not always obtain or retain supporting documentation (such
as certificates of birth, marriage, or adoption) to support new dependents met
the enrollment criteria. Our test of dependent eligibility for 10 employees,
hired during fiscal years 2018 to 2022 who added three or more dependents,
disclosed that for 4 employees, supporting documentation was not available to
support the validity of 11 of 58 total dependents. For example, for one
employee with six dependents, City Schools could not provide documentation
(such as birth certificates) for five dependents.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that City Schools
a. obtain and review supporting documentation to ensure the propriety of
TPA billings;
b. obtain audits in accordance with its contract to ensure the propriety of
claims billed, assess the accuracy and validity of claim reimbursements
42

--- Page 45 ---
made by the TPAs, verify that all drug rebates due were received, and
assess penalties when performance goals are not met; and
c. ensure that all required documentation for new employee dependents is
obtained and retained for future reference, as required.
43

--- Page 46 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Baltimore City Public School
System (City Schools). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
which generally requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school
systems to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management
practices. This performance audit was performed in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the City Schools’ procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the City Schools’ policies provided for the efficient use
of financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of City Schools, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in
accordance with the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas
included revenue and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements,
human resources and payroll, equipment control, information technology security
and control, facilities, transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the
management of other risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on City Schools dated October 17,
2018, was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope
for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the City Schools’ Comprehensive Education Master
Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of
44

--- Page 47 ---
any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by City Schools. We also interviewed
personnel at City Schools and the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and to the
extent practicable, observations of City Schools’ operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2021 to
June 30, 2023.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits City
Schools’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the City Schools’ automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
City Schools’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
45

--- Page 48 ---
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to City Schools, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
City Schools that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to City Schools and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from February 2023 to November 2023. City
Schools’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise City Schools regarding the results of our
review of its response.
46

--- Page 49 ---
APPENDIX
January 17, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
City Schools thanks you for the opportunity to respond to your report of December 20, 2024. We view
these audits as an opportunity to evaluate how we are performing and how we can improve, and we
believe City Schools has improved as a result of your report and our interactions with the OLA team.
ln general, we found your report to be a useful assessment of certain processes and practices at City
Schools. As you review our responses, we hope you see the ongoing focus on improvement in our
processes and policies, and the positive impact of the legislative audit. Though in some cases we may
not agree on an exact interpretation of a given contract term or other details, we believe our collective
work with you and your findings will help City Schools continue to improve our services to the schools,
students and families of our city.
If you have any questions about this submission, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Best regards,
Christopher J. Doherty
Chief Financial Officer

--- Page 50 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
City Schools did not properly perform and document bid evaluations
resulting in a lack of assurance that contracts were awarded to the
appropriate vendors including at least two contracts totaling $5.1 million
that appeared to have been improperly awarded.
We recommend that City Schools properly perform and document bid
evaluations to support contract award decisions. Specifically, City Schools
should
a. ensure individual evaluation committee member scoring sheets are
properly completed, signed, summarized, and retained;
b. complete bid evaluations in accordance with the method specified in the
contract solicitation to ensure contracts are properly evaluated; and
c. reevaluate its prior contract award decisions, including those noted
above, to determine if bid evaluations properly supported the award and
consult with legal counsel regarding necessary corrective actions for any
contracts that were not properly awarded.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We would like to provide the following context:
additional comments as
deemed necessary. • For 3 out of the 4 sampled RFPs, the final evaluation memos are
signed by the committee members as documented and shared.
• For the 4th RFP sample, due to the complexity of the procurement,
we engaged a facilitator/consultant who compiled a comprehensive
final evaluation report based on the committee’s documented
evaluation. Evaluators were required to review and acknowledge
their evaluation roles and responsibilities. Each evaluator also
signed a confidentiality agreement prior to the evaluation process.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of City Schools will ensure that scoring sheets are completed. After bid
corrective action or evaluations are complete, City Schools will continue to retain
explain disagreement. documentation as required.
Page 1 of 23

--- Page 51 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The correct vendor was awarded, and the final decision represents the
corrective action or best vendor for the project based on the vendor's qualifications and
explain disagreement. proposal.
Moving forward, a quality control process has been integrated during the
solicitation finalization and pre-evaluation kickoff meeting to ensure that
the evaluation criteria are clearly understood and correctly applied,
maintaining fairness and impartiality in all future evaluations.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of City Schools has re-evaluated the contracts in this finding and maintains
corrective action or that the proper vendor was awarded.
explain disagreement.
Moving forward, a quality control process has been integrated during the
solicitation finalization and pre-evaluation kickoff meeting to ensure that
the evaluation criteria are clearly understood and correctly applied,
maintaining fairness and impartiality in all future evaluations.
Page 2 of 23

--- Page 52 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
City Schools did not monitor vendor invoices to ensure they were paid
timely. Our analysis of vendor payments from July 1, 2021 to February 28,
2023 disclosed that 16,632 invoices (12 percent) totaling $142 million were
paid 90 days or more after the invoice date recorded on the City Schools’
financial management system.
We recommend that City Schools establish a centralized monitoring process
to ensure that invoices are date stamped when received and paid timely.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of In July of 2023, City Schools updated our financial system to a new
corrective action or financial management system (ERP) which provides additional
explain disagreement. capabilities for reporting and monitoring payments.
City Schools is currently in the process of updating our standard
operating procedures, which includes a software program that would
allow vendors access to a supplier portal, giving them the capability to
upload invoices directly to our financial system that includes a time
stamp which will be considered the receipt date.
Page 3 of 23

--- Page 53 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
City Schools did not obtain required supporting documentation from
vendors to verify the propriety of amounts invoiced.
We recommend that City Schools obtain required supporting documentation
from vendors for invoices (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of City Schools’ per pupil funding model allows departments and schools
corrective action or to procure goods and services via district managed contracts with
explain disagreement. centralized oversight. Like the formula in the Blueprint for Maryland’s
future, this model distributes resources based on student characteristics
to meet the needs of students in each school and through the services
provided by centralized departments. City Schools’ Finance Department
is taking steps to ensure consistent compliance with contract terms
across departments and schools.
To improve consistency between contract monitors, City Schools has
already implemented two key strategies:
• Training Modules for Contract Monitors: We are providing
enhanced reference and training materials to staff listed as
contract monitors on contracts. These individuals are responsible
for ensuring that vendors comply with the contract terms and
conditions, including verifying that appropriate documentation is
submitted with invoices.
• Creation of Centralized Contract Monitor Positions: For
FY25, we have established two centralized contract monitor
positions. These employees will oversee the district’s largest
contracts used by schools and central departments to monitor
spending, ensure all submitted invoices are properly documented,
and make certain invoices are in compliance with contract terms.
Page 4 of 23

--- Page 54 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into City Schools’ procurement policies and were not
consistently used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPAs).
We recommend that City Schools incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide City Schools will update our ICPA checklist and process to
additional comments as ensure that we are meeting all best practice standards. We
deemed necessary. would like to provide additional clarification on our current
practices in utilizing ICPAs to ensure procurement efficiency
and best value for the district:
• The use of ICPAs is a valuable tool for obtaining necessary
goods and services, aggregating volume, securing best
pricing, and reducing administrative overhead. Public
purchasers seek to optimize pricing, transaction costs, and
processing time through strategic cooperative procurement.
• Our procurement requests to the Board for ICPAs include
extensive information in the Board letter request. These
requests are reviewed and assessed by the Director of
Procurement, and the selection methodology is carefully
documented and approved at the determination of the
Director of Procurement.
• City Schools follows a checklist process for researching,
comparing, and evaluating ICPAs to ensure the best value.
Our ICPA checklist, which captures statutory requirements
and best practices, helps verify competitive bidding, public
advertisement, and the presence of piggyback clauses.
• For each of the six (6) ICPAs referenced in the audit, a
contract was executed for each of the procurements as
provided to auditors, documenting City Schools'
participation. While City Schools confirmed with the
Page 5 of 23

--- Page 55 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
initiating/procuring agency that we could use the ICPA,
City Schools did not document these interactions for the
ICPAs that required it, such as those ICPAs unrelated to a
Consortium or similar cooperative group. Moving
forward, City Schools will document the cooperative
agreement with the Lead Agency through an addendum or
other appropriate recording methodology.
• For each of the six (6) ICPAs referenced in the audit,
comparative competitive contracts, were assessed to ensure
City Schools chose the most favorable agreement for the
district. Going forward, City Schools will retain the
supporting documentation for the required Procurement
reviews and appropriate evaluative comparisons conducted
for the ICPAs, and will maintain this supporting
documentation.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion
Complete
Date:
Please provide details ICPA Policy Update - On February 28, 2024, City Schools
of corrective action or updated its ICPA policy to enhance best practice language,
explain disagreement. further aligning our procurement processes with ever-evolving
standards and ensuring compliance with current regulations.
Page 6 of 23

--- Page 56 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
City Schools did not always prepare required written justifications when
procuring contracts using the sole source method and did not always publish
contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA), as required.
We recommend that City Schools
a. ensure that sole source contract justifications are prepared as required
and include appropriate information to document the rationale for not
performing a competitive procurement (repeat), and
b. publish sole source contract awards on eMMA, as required (repeat),
including the contract award noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide City Schools acknowledges the audit's observations
additional comments as regarding the preparation of sole source justifications.
deemed necessary. During the audit period, the Sole Source Justification Form
was primarily used for small procurements under $50,000.
For contracts requiring Board approval (over $50,000), a
separate justification form was not used because the Board
letter included a justification section outlining the rationale
for the sole source procurement.
High-level written summaries for sole source procurements
were included in Board agendas.
While City Schools believes the justifications provided in
the Board letters and agendas were sufficient, additional
detail could have enhanced clarity. Going forward, City
Schools will include a completed Sole Source Template
Form for submission along with the Board Letter for
compliance with Board Policy.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion
Ongoing
Date:
Please provide details City Schools will ensure that sole source contract justifications
of corrective action or are prepared and include appropriate information to document
explain disagreement. the rationale for sole-source justification.
Page 7 of 23

--- Page 57 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion
Ongoing
Date:
Please provide details City Schools recognizes the requirement to publish sole source
of corrective action or contract awards on the eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
explain disagreement. (eMMA) platform and will ensure compliance.
Page 8 of 23

--- Page 58 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
City Schools did not have adequate controls over vendor bid submissions.
We recommend that City Schools ensure all vendor bid proposals submitted
are adequately secured prior to opening.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of City Schools acknowledges the auditors’ concerns regarding
corrective action or electronically submitted vendor bid proposals and the associated policies
explain disagreement. and controls. The shift to electronic submissions was a direct response to
the global COVID-19 pandemic, which required a rapid adaptation in
procurement processes. Organizations that previously received hard
copies of bids and proposals had to pivot quickly to electronic
submissions, including email, to maintain operations.
City Schools has always prioritized the security of bids and proposals
prior to the bid due date, and while there is no statutory or regulatory
mandate specifying how bids must be received, our practices have
consistently aimed to ensure that vendor submissions are handled
securely.
In a meeting with the OLA auditors on June 14, 2023, it was
recommended that City Schools consider password-protecting electronic
submissions or transitioning to receiving bids through eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA). Following this discussion, City
Schools made an immediate shift to using eMMA for sourcing bids. This
was fully implemented on September 1, 2023, after the State of
Maryland conducted training for our procurement staff on August 16,
2023.
On February 28, 2024, City Schools updated our procurement
regulations to include detailed procedures and controls for electronically
submitted vendor bids. These updates reflect our commitment to
maintaining secure and compliant procurement processes.
Page 9 of 23

--- Page 59 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
City Schools did not always prepare and approve purchase orders prior to
obtaining goods or services, as required.
We recommend that City Schools ensure that procurement policies and
automated system controls are not bypassed by ensuring purchase orders are
prepared and approved prior to obtaining the related goods or services
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of City Schools agrees with this recommendation. It is important to note,
corrective action or however, that due to efforts aimed at reducing the number of confirming
explain disagreement. POs, City Schools has successfully decreased the number from more
than 1,000 in FY23 to approximately 750 in FY24. By continuing these
efforts— including sending compliance reports to offices detailing the
number of POs and amounts, and requiring explanations for confirming
POs—City Schools expects to see further reductions in the future.
There are situations, such as emergency repairs or urgent transportation
needs for students, where emergency procurement purchase orders must
be issued after services have been provided. Confirming purchase orders
may also be necessary when invoice dates predate the purchase order
requisition date, for activities such as professional development
registration, online training courses, or meeting space rental. For
example, Baltimore City College is an International Baccalaureate
school that requires an annual membership fee to an international
organization. This organization mandates payment without a purchase
order to maintain the school's membership.
For all other instances not falling into these categories, schools and
departments are expected to follow City Schools’ procurement
processes, ensuring that purchase orders are fully approved prior to the
Page 10 of 23

--- Page 60 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
ordering of goods or services. This requirement is clearly outlined on the
City Schools website for vendor awareness.
City Schools will continue to provide compliance reports to offices,
listing the number of POs and amounts and requiring explanation for the
confirming PO.
Page 11 of 23

--- Page 61 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 8
City Schools did not always perform a newly required screening before
hiring certain applicants for positions involving direct contact with minors.
We recommend that City Schools perform and document the required
screening for positions involving direct contact with minors, including those
noted above, in compliance with State law.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8 Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of Immediate Documentation Collection
corrective action or
explain disagreement. The Office of Human Capital has implemented the following plan to
gather the necessary documentation for employees hired or promoted
since the law took effect:
1. Identification and Outreach: We have identified employees
whose prior work history must be collected in accordance with
HB 486 guidelines.
2. Request for Information: Human Capital has begun contacting
these employees via email on a rolling basis, requesting their
work history for the past 10 years, as well as the contact
information for their previous employers.
3. Employer Verification: After receiving the contact information,
Human Capital completes the employer portion of the required
form and sends it to previous employers for verification.
4. Document Management: Once the completed forms are
returned by employers, Human Capital securely stores all HB
486 documents electronically.
Process Automation
To improve future compliance and reduce manual processing, we are in
the process of procuring an integration with our employee records
Page 12 of 23

--- Page 62 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
systems. This integration will automatically collect HB 486 information
and electronically send the required forms to former employers for
completion. Once a new hire is cleared to start, their documentation will
be sent to previous employers electronically, and completed forms will
be returned via the same system, creating an efficient, manageable
workflow. We are currently finalizing this procurement to secure the
integration.
Page 13 of 23

--- Page 63 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
City Schools did not pursue collection of $1.5 million due from third parties
for services being provided by five City School employees.
We recommend that City Schools take appropriate action to ensure
appropriate and timely billing and collection efforts are made for amounts
owed by outside organizations (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The specific issue in this finding stems from a historic agreement
additional comments as between City Schools and certain of our unions, which allowed
deemed necessary. employees to provide services to unions on a full-release basis.
While there may have been gaps in billing, a comprehensive invoice was
issued. As a result of these efforts, we were reimbursed in the amounts
of $331,385.93 on September 11, 2024 by one union, as well as
$779,761.40 on May 8, 2024 and $344,155.83 on September 4, 2024
from another union. These three payments total $1,455,303.16.
Recommendation 9 Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of City Schools agrees to ensure that we appropriately bill for amounts
corrective action or owed by outside organizations and make timely collection efforts.
explain disagreement.
Page 14 of 23

--- Page 64 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 10
City Schools did not adequately monitor and control police overtime, and did
not always pre-approve overtime as required by its existing policy.
We recommend that City Schools
a. analyze police overtime usage to ensure that it is not excessive and is
consistent with its policies;
b. establish maximum limits on overtime and secondary employment hours
worked by an officer to ensure the extra work does not impact their
performance; and
c. ensure overtime is pre-approved as required by its policy.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments
as deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details With new leadership in place, City Schools is implementing enhanced
of corrective action or procedures, including regular reviews of school police overtime data to
ensure that overtime is used efficiently and appropriately.
explain disagreement.
City Schools is launching a new timekeeping system that will require all
employees—including police officers—to digitally clock in and out.
This system has the capability to automate reports and provide regular
monthly reports to support oversight and ensure proper overtime
management.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details With new leadership in place, City Schools is implementing enhanced
of corrective action or procedures, including exploring placing limits on overtime.
explain disagreement.
City Schools is launching a new timekeeping system that will require all
employees—including police officers—to digitally clock in and out.
This system has the capability to automate reports and provide regular
monthly reports to support oversight and ensure proper overtime
management.
Recommendation 10c Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Page 15 of 23

--- Page 65 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details With new leadership in place, City Schools is implementing enhanced
of corrective action or procedures, including ensuring that overtime is pre-approved.
explain disagreement.
City Schools is launching a new timekeeping system that will require all
employees—including police officers—to digitally clock in and out.
This system has the capability to automate reports and provide regular
monthly reports to support oversight and ensure proper overtime
management.
Page 16 of 23

--- Page 66 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
OLA has determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings
11 through 13 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although, the specifics
of the following findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along
with City Schools’ responses, have been redacted from this report copy, City
Schools’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and related
recommendations.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 17 of 23

--- Page 67 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 14
City Schools could not document its review and approval of bus contractor
invoices and did not assess certain available liquidated damages.
We recommend that City Schools
a. conduct documented verifications of amounts invoiced (repeat); and
b. assess all available liquidated damages when vendors do not comply with
the terms of applicable contracts, including for those instances noted
above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments
as deemed necessary.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion June
14a Date: 2025
Please provide details City Schools has a strict process in place for reviewing and
of corrective action or verifying invoices for bus contractors. We will clearly
explain disagreement. document this process and our procedures so that it is fully
transparent and properly documented.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion
14b Date:
Please provide details City Schools will closely monitor contracts and will assess
of corrective action or damages where appropriate. City Schools will develop an
explain disagreement. internal process to support the City Schools conclusion to
assess damages or to waive/reduce damages relating to
contract issues. City Schools will document the reasoning
per our written procedures to assess or waive/reduce
damages. These considerations could include shared
culpability, lack of certifications for drivers or buses, or
other considerations.
City Schools notes that the following liquidated damages
have been assessed over the past several years:
Page 18 of 23

--- Page 68 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
School Year Total Remarks
SY2024-25 $33,384.21 Through 9/30/2024
SY2023-24 $113,702.70
SY2022-23 $202,375.98
SY2021-22 $82,722.40
To provide clearer guidance going forward, City Schools
will update contract language to clarify that that City
Schools "may" collect liquidated damages based on specific
circumstances, and the possible application if those
circumstances arise.
Finding 15
City Schools paid bus contractors for van transportation services that were
not included in the bus contracts and without any contract modifications or
obtaining Board approval.
We recommend that City Schools process formal contract modifications for
changes to the scope of the bus contracts, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 15 Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of It was the understanding of City Schools that our process
corrective action or was consistent with Maryland law and Baltimore City
explain disagreement. Board of School Commissioners policies and
regulations. See, e.g., Md. Code Ann. Educ. Sections 4-
205(d), 5-112; Board Policy DJA; Administrative
Regulation DJA-RA.
The legal requirement is that the Board must approve
contract awards for amounts in excess of $100,000 (subject
Page 19 of 23

--- Page 69 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
to certain exceptions). The Board regularly complies with
this requirement. When City Schools submits contract
award authorization requests to the Board, the procurement
authorization request, which we call a Board letter, includes
the total authorized “spend” amount of the contract, the
duration/term of the contract, and any optional
extension/renewal terms, and a high-level summary of the
services or goods that are being authorized for purchase
through the contract award.
The Board authorizes City Schools staff, subject to review
and approval by the Procurement Director, Chief Executive
Officer, and Office of Legal Counsel, among others, to
negotiate the specific terms and effectuate amendments to
those specific contract terms.
City Schools will document contract modifications and seek
Board approval for any significant contract award changes
exceeding $100,000.
Page 20 of 23

--- Page 70 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
School Board Oversight
Finding 16
City Schools did not take appropriate follow-up action when individuals did
not file the required annual disclosure statements.
We recommend that City Schools
a. ensure that all applicable individuals file the required annual disclosure
statements; and
b. take appropriate documented follow-up action when individuals do not
file as required, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide City Schools consistently reminded individuals to complete their
additional comments as statements and forwarded a list of those who did not complete statements
deemed necessary. to the Board of School Commissioners, who shared the list with the
Baltimore City Public Schools’ Ethics Panel in December of 2023. This
action was entered into the public record when it was shared with the
Board of School Commissioners during their Executive Board Meeting
on December 12, 2023. Referral to the Board and the Ethics Panel
constitutes appropriate follow-up action, as they are the entities in charge
of these policies. Please see attached documentation that illustrates this
assertion.1
Recommendation 16a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of City Schools will make efforts to have all applicable individuals file the
corrective action or required annual disclosure statements.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 16b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of City Schools will make efforts to have all applicable individuals file the
corrective action or required annual disclosure statements.
explain disagreement.
1 City Schools did not provide the referenced documentation.
Page 21 of 23

--- Page 71 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 17
City Schools did not obtain and review claim data or audit healthcare
activity from its third-party administrators.
We recommend that City Schools
a. obtain and review supporting documentation to ensure the propriety of
TPA billings;
b. obtain audits in accordance with its contract to ensure the propriety of
claims billed, assess the accuracy and validity of claim reimbursements
made by the TPAs, verify that all drug rebates due were received, and
assess penalties when performance goals are not met; and
c. ensure that all required documentation for new employee dependents is
obtained and retained for future reference, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments
as deemed necessary.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion December
17a Date: 2025
Please provide details City Schools reviews data and information regarding claims
of corrective action or on a weekly and monthly basis. These reports are provided by
explain disagreement. our insurance providers and include standard information
typically shared with large organizations that have self-
funded insurance plans of our size.
City Schools will work with our insurance provider and our
healthcare benefits consultant, to determine what additional
reporting can be offered without compromising employee
privacy.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion December
17b Date: 2025
Please provide details Our healthcare audit began in September 2024 and our last
of corrective action or audit was completed in 2017. The healthcare benefits
explain disagreement. consultant has recently recommended that we increase the
number of audits to every 3 to 5 years; we have accepted this
Page 22 of 23

--- Page 72 ---
Baltimore City Public Schools
Agency Response Form
recommendation and will be adjusting our audit schedule
appropriately. We also conducted a pharmaceutical audit in
2023.
We will work with our healthcare consultants and our TPAs
to determine a reasonable process, aligned with best practices,
to review performance measures.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Ongoing;
17c Date: November
2025
Please provide details City Schools is consistent in collecting the documentation
of corrective action or referenced before enrolling dependents. However, City
explain disagreement. Schools could not produce the documentation requested
because these documents were accidentally destroyed several
months earlier than our document retention schedule permits.
Starting November, 2025 (postponed from January 2025), all
document submissions will be stored electronically in our
new ERP system. Documents will continue to be retained for
the required 7-year period.
When enrolling a dependent in a health plan, a copy of the
following documentation is required. Documentation must
also be resubmitted for dependents previously covered before
the current plan year.
• Spouse: Marriage certificate and, if married for more
than 12 months, a tax return filed within the past two
years showing the same address for both spouses.
• Dependent Child (by birth): Birth certificate.
• Dependent Child (by adoption or guardianship):
Birth certificate and official court documents.
• Stepchild: Birth certificate and marriage certificate.
Disabled Dependent: Birth certificate and a completed
Disabled Dependent Waiver Request Form (the dependent
must have been covered under the plan prior to age 19).
Page 23 of 23

--- Page 73 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
James M. Fowler, CFE
Walter L. Horan, IV
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Senior Auditors
Matthew P. Henry
Jacob M. Kasten
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors