Title: Talbot County Public Schools
Date: 03/06/2025
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67d04fccf04accd3f457b441
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:16:06.589456
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Talbot County Public Schools
March 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 6, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Talbot
County Public Schools (TCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether TCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that TCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive, as they did not incorporate certain requirements of State law and
recognized best practices for participating in intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements, require a written justification for using a sole source
procurement process, or require publication of contract solicitations and awards
on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required by State law. As a
result, these requirements were not always consistently used when obtaining
goods and services. In addition, TCPS did not always obtain Talbot County
Board of Education approval for contract awards as required by its policies.
Additionally, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our

--- Page 4 ---
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit also disclosed procedure and control deficiencies related to human
resource and payroll activity, contracts for school bus services such as fuel and
maintenance, food services, and its third-party administrator that provides health
care claims processing services. For example, we noted that TCPS did not always
have required written employment contracts and approvals for certain employee
payroll.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 9 of the 13
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated July 17, 2013. For the non-
cybersecurity-related findings we determined that TCPS satisfactorily addressed 2
of those 4 findings. The remaining 2 findings are repeated in this report.
TCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of TCPS’ response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response and noted general
agreement to our findings and related recommendations, and while there are other
aspects of the response which will require further clarification, we do not
anticipate that these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s
attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
TCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 8
External Audits 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 13
Revenue and Billing Cycle 13
Federal Funds 13
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 16
practices were not incorporated into Talbot County Public Schools
(TCPS) procurement policies and were not consistently used when
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Finding 2 – TCPS did not have a sufficiently comprehensive procurement 18
policy and did not comply with certain State procurement laws.
Finding 3 – TCPS did not properly report all vendor payments in 19
aggregate of $25,000 or more to the Department of Budget and
Management as required.
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4 – TCPS had not obtained the Board’s review and approval of 21
certain salary scales and the salaries for four executive-level employees
for which written contracts were not prepared, as required by State law.
Equipment Control and Accountability 22
Information Technology
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
3

--- Page 6 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 23
Transportation Services
Finding 8 – TCPS did not ensure that fuel rates charged by its fuel 24
vendor agreed to the related contract.
∗ Finding 9 – TCPS did not solicit bids or enter into written contracts 25
when procuring bus maintenance and certain contractor services.
Food Services
Finding 10 – TCPS did not obtain and review support for reimbursable 26
food and labor costs to ensure amounts invoiced by the food service
management contract vendor were supported and complied with USDA
regulations.
School Board Oversight
Finding 11 – As of December 2023, TCPS had not implemented changes 28
to its ethics policies recommended by the State Ethics Commission in
March 2022.
Management of Other Risks
∗ Finding 12 – TCPS did not obtain and review claims data or verify the 29
eligibility of enrolled dependents and did not adequately monitor the
performance of its third-party administrator (TPA).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Talbot County Public Schools (TCPS) ranks
21st in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2023 full-time student enrollment was 4,523 students. TCPS had 8
schools, consisting of 5 elementary, 1 middle school, 1 middle/high school, and 1
high school.
Funding
TCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Talbot County, the State,
and the federal government. According to TCPS’ audited financial statements,
revenues from all sources totaled approximately $83.7 million in fiscal year 2023,
including $23.3 million from the State. According to MSDE’s records, the State
funding included formula funding grants totaling $17.7 million, and State-share
for employee pension payments totaling $3.4 million. See Figure 1 (on the
following page) for TCPS’ enrollment and funding by source for the six-year
period from fiscal year 2018 through fiscal year 2023. See Figure 2 (on page 10)
for revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year 2023 according to its
audited financial statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
TCPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2018 through 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
4,703
4,674
4,646
4,524 4,533
4,523
$60.6
$52.1
$43.6 $45.3 $47.1 $47.0
$29.1
$26.4
$24.4 $23.8 $23.3
$17.1
$12.6 $13.4
$6.5 $7.4 $8.1 $7.7
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Enrollment Local State Federal and Other
S tate funding for fiscal year 2023 included:
• $17.7 million for Foundation Formula Grants
• $3.4 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
• $0.6 million for Capital Projects
• $1.6 million for other State funding
Source: TCPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
TCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2023
Other
$668
4%
Federal
$2,310
12%
Local
$10,381
State
56%
$5,157
28%
Source: TCPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education system to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016, to review the adequacy
of funding for education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Poverty, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides additional
funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as, Pre-kindergarten Aid).
Expenditures
According to TCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2023 expenditures
were approximately $82.5 million. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 79 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2023. According to MSDE records, during
the 2022-2023 school year, TCPS had 681 full-time equivalent positions, which
consisted of 451 instructional and 230 non-instructional positions. Instruction
accounted for 63 percent of TCPS’ expenditures on a categorical basis (see Figure
3).
Figure 3
TCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2023
(amounts in millions)
$51.6
Instruction
63%
$8.9
Administration & Support
11%
$8.1
Special Education
10%
$7.4
Facilities & Capital Projects
9%
$3.3
Food Service
4%
$3.2
Transportation
3%
Source: TCPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
TCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and two non-voting student members. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of TCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with TCPS to comply with
8

--- Page 11 ---
the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Talbot County government
also exercises authority over TCPS primarily through the review and approval of
TCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a seven-member
Board appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
Board Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker
of the House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, the Maryland State Department of Education, and the
Interagency Commission on School Construction. Specifically, the law provides
that the OIGE may receive and investigate information and complaints concerning
potential fraud, waste, and abuse of public funds and property; civil rights
violations involving students or employees; whether policies and procedures
governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with
applicable federal and State laws; and compliance with other applicable federal
and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
review, the OIGE issued one public report related to TCPS reviews and
investigations. We considered the report during our current audit.
9

--- Page 12 ---
External Audits
As required by State law, TCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of TCPS as of June 30, 2018, 2019,
2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023, and the respective changes in its financial position
and its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
TCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of TCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independently audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
TCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance
to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the
entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2018 through 2023 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2022 financial statement audit and Single Audit, which were the
latest available during our audit fieldwork. Our review did not note any
deficiencies that warranted inclusion in this report. In addition, certain work of
the independent certified public accounting firm, which we determined was
reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a result, we did not
conduct any audit work related to the following areas:
• State and local government revenues received via electronic funds transfer
• Accounts receivable
• Federal grant activity
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, TCPS obtained an
exemption on December 6, 2016 from the 6-year audit cycle covering fiscal years
2017 to 2022. Therefore, our most recent audit report was dated July 17, 2013.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 9 of the 13
findings contained in the July 17, 2013 report. As disclosed in Figure 4, for the
non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that TCPS satisfactorily
addressed 2 of these 4 findings. The remaining 2 findings are repeated in this
report.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 1 Internal control deficiencies could allow improper payments Status Redacted2
TCPS did not always ensure that procurements were competitively
Finding 2 Not Repeated
procured or justified as sole source procurements
Certain system users had unneeded capabilities in the automated
Finding 3 human resources and payroll system, and reports of personnel and Status Redacted2
payroll changes were not generated for review.
TCPS’ policies and physical inventory procedures need Not repeated
Finding 4
improvement to safeguard equipment. (Not followed up on)
Administrative access to the TCPS network was excessive, and
Finding 5 database monitoring and password and account controls over Status Redacted2
critical systems were not sufficient.
TCPS did not have an information technology disaster recovery
Finding 6 plan and antivirus protection for TCPS computers was frequently Status Redacted2
not installed or up-to-date.
Finding 7 The TCPS network was not properly secured. Status Redacted2
TCPS’ bus routing procedures were not comprehensive and
Finding 8 automated routing software capabilities were not adequately used Not repeated
to develop more efficient routes.
TCPS did not solicit bids when procuring bus maintenance and
Repeated
Finding 9 certain bus contractor services, or enter into contracts for the
(Current Finding 9)
services.
TCPS should strengthen internal controls over the purchasing of Not repeated
Finding 10
food supplies. (Not followed up on)
Not repeated
Finding 11 TCPS had not properly collateralized certain cash deposits.
(Not followed up on)
Not repeated
Finding 12 TCPS had not developed a formal debt management policy.
(Not followed up on)
TCPS had not verified the eligibility of dependents enrolled in
TCPS’ health insurance program and had not ensured that claims Repeated
Finding 13
paid by the third-party health care administrator were reviewed for (Current Finding 12)
propriety.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Talbot County Public Schools (TCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Talbot County, the State, and the federal government. According
to TCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled
approximately $83.7 million in fiscal year 2023, including approximately $23.3
million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited TCPS’ financial statements and the objectives
of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via
electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s
procedural reviews (related to the fiscal year 2022 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2023, school
activity collections totaled $520,000 and the June 30, 2023 fund balance was
$397,000. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of this activity,
we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area, including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
Federal Funds
Background
TCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are generally
restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch Program or
Special Education). According to TCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year 2023 (latest
13

--- Page 16 ---
available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled approximately
$10.6 million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $6.4 million in fiscal year 2021 to $10 million in fiscal
year 2022 (56 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding. Specifically,
according to TCPS’ records, as of June 30, 2023, TCPS was awarded federal
COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $16.9 million to be distributed over
federal fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental
Appropriations Act, and the American Rescue Plan.3 TCPS can request
extensions up until March 2026 from the federal grant programs for distributing
any funds not used by the end of the grant period (mostly by the end of federal
fiscal year 2024).
As of June 30, 2023, according to TCPS records, expenditures related to these
COVID-19 grants totaled $9.4 million, and were primarily comprised of staffing,
laptops, and instructional software and materials. We were advised by TCPS that
it plans to request an extension to expend the remaining funds.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of TCPS’ federal grants and the objectives of our
audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on TCPS compliance with
the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2018 through 2023. Our review of
the Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in this
report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
TCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to TCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
3 In addition to the federal grants, TCPS was also awarded local COVID-19 grants totaling
$207,000, all of which had been spent as of June 30, 2023. Local grants are subject to review
and testing during our audit.
14

--- Page 17 ---
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in June 2023 of the results of its review of 45 student case
files for 34 criteria. The report did not specifically address the propriety of
Medicaid billing but overall concluded that TCPS was generally compliant with
most criteria. For example, TCPS was 100 percent compliant with 31 criteria and
between 90 and 99 percent compliant with 3 criteria.
According to TCPS records, fiscal year 2023 State and federal reimbursements for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $830,000, which was an
increase of $406,000 from the previous fiscal year. Based on our current
assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives, our audit did
not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in this area, including policies, procedures, and controls with respect
to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and TCPS’ records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $16.4 million during fiscal year 2023. TCPS uses an
automated financial management system for purchases and disbursements.
Requisitions are created in the system by departments and are subject to online
departmental and purchasing department approvals. The TCPS Finance
Department is responsible for procuring goods and services requested by
individual schools and departments. Purchase orders are prepared in the system
by the Finance Department based on approved requisitions.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable department for
entry into the financial management system. The system matches invoices to
appropriate purchasing documents and the verification of receipt entered by the
receiving school or department. Payments are processed by the Finance Office
through the automated system, which either prints vendor checks or processes an
electronic payment and posts the payment to the financial records.
Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that procurements exceeding $50,000 be competitively bid. TCPS’
procurement policy requires that procurements of contracts and agreements
valued at $25,000 or more, be approved by the Talbot County Board of Education
15

--- Page 18 ---
(Board) except where competitive bids exceed the amount budgeted or the
Assistant Superintendent recommends the award be made to other than the lowest
responsible bidder.
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into TCPS procurement policies and were not consistently used
when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements
(ICPA).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into TCPS procurement policies and were not consistently used
when participating in an ICPA. State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland
General Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies, allows the
use of ICPAs only after the using entity has met the statutory requirement of
determining (or assessed) in writing that the use of such arrangements will
provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or promote
intergovernmental cooperation.4
Our review of TCPS procurement policies disclosed that the above statutory
requirement as well as the following critical best practices were not included:
• Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
• Research, compare and evaluate available ICPAs;
• Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties;
• Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised;
• Obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation
(including public advertisements and proposal evaluations);
• Verify terms, scope of services, specifications and price meet our needs;
4 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5- 112(a)(3) of the Education Article of the Code provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
16

--- Page 19 ---
• Execute an addendum of participation with the lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
• Obtain a copy of the ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification.
In addition, we tested TCPS’ participation in five ICPAs (selected based on
significance and risk), awarded during fiscal years 2020 through 2023, totaling
approximately $3.1 million. Our review disclosed that for all 5 ICPAs tested,
TCPS did not adhere to three best practices (preparing a written assessment of the
benefits of using the ICPAs; analyzing the costs of conducting competitive
solicitations; and researching, comparing, and evaluating other available ICPAs).
Furthermore, for 3 of the 5 ICPAs tested totaling $2.8 million, TCPS had not
obtained a copy of the contract pricing for invoice verification.
We did find that other best practices were generally performed despite not being
included in TCPS’ policies. For example, TCPS verified the ICPA solicitation
allowed utilization by other parties and was competitively bid and publicly
advertised for four of the five ICPAs tested. Incorporating ICPA best practices
into TCPS procurement policies could help ensure they are consistently used.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, the practices also require that ICPA users ensure that the contract was
awarded through a competitive procurement process, that addendums be executed
documenting their participation, and that all local required terms and conditions
are incorporated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that TCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 2
TCPS did not have a sufficiently comprehensive procurement policy and did
not comply with certain State procurement laws.
Analysis
TCPS did not have a sufficiently comprehensive policy to govern procurements
and our testing disclosed that TCPS did not comply with its existing policy and
certain State procurement laws. Based on procurement method and significance,
we tested 14 contracts totaling approximately $9.2 million, which included 3 sole
source contracts totaling $1.5 million, 6 competitively procured contracts totaling
$4.7 million, and 5 intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements totaling
$3 million. These 14 contracts were awarded during fiscal years 2020 through
2023.
• TCPS did not prepare justifications for utilizing the sole source procurement
method and obtain Board approval for all three sole source contracts. TCPS’
Procurement Policy did not require a written justification for using a sole
source procurement method as required by State law for State agencies. The
Policy allows for sole source contracts when it is determined that only one
vendor can provide the goods or services, or it is in TCPS’ best interest to
award a contract without a competitive solicitation. Although the Policy
requires that documentation be provided to the Board to allow them to decide
whether to authorize the procurement, it is unclear what specific information
should be included. Our testing disclosed that no written justifications were
prepared for the 3 sole source procurements tested. In addition, these
contracts were not submitted to the Board for approval.
• Competitive procurements were not always approved by the Board. TCPS’
Procurement Policy did not require Board approval when the lowest
responsible bidder was selected for award, regardless of the value of the
contract. Instead, one management employee had the authority to award the
contract after confirming that the bid met specifications. This practice is not
consistent with other local education agencies, which generally require Board
approval for all contracts over a certain dollar threshold (for example,
$25,000).
Our testing disclosed that one contract totaling approximately $2.7 million
was not approved by the Board because it was awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder. In addition, two of the remaining 5 competitively
procured contracts tested (individually valued at more than $300,000) were
not approved by the Board even though it was required by the Policy.
18

--- Page 21 ---
• TCPS’ Procurement Policy did not require publication of contract
solicitations and awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)5 as
required by State law. Rather, the Policy only required solicitations and
awards to be posted in a newspaper. According to State law, the solicitation
and award of contracts of $50,000 or more procured by public schools after
July 1, 2022, are required to be published on eMMA.6 Publishing solicitations
and awards on eMMA provides enhanced competition and transparency over
procurements including information about the winning bidders and the
amount of the related awards.
Our review disclosed that awards for 3 of the sole source contracts tested
totaling $1.5 million were not published on eMMA and neither the solicitation
or award was published for a fourth competitively procured contract totaling
$339,000.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that TCPS
a. establish a comprehensive policy, approved by the Board, that governs
sole source procurements;
b. prepare written justifications when the sole source procurement method
is used;
c. obtain Board approval for sole source contracts totaling $25,000 or more
as required;
d. revise its procurement policies to require all competitively bid contracts
(regardless if the lowest bidder is selected) be submitted to the Board for
review and approval; and
e. ensure contract solicitations and awards are published on eMMA as
required.
Finding 3
TCPS did not properly report all vendor payments in aggregate of $25,000 or
more to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), as required to
enhance transparency of the procurement process.
Analysis
TCPS did not always report all vendor payments in aggregate of $25,000 or more
to DBM as required. Effective July 1, 2019, Chapter 541, Laws of Maryland
2019 requires local education agencies to annually report specified information
5 eMMA is an internet-based interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services
6 Effective July 1, 2024, the threshold for publishing on eMMA increased to $100,000.
19

--- Page 22 ---
for the immediately preceding fiscal year to DBM beginning January 1, 2020.7
DBM uses the information to report the procurements on the Maryland
Transparency Portal, a public website that allows the public to search and view
information about payments to vendors to enhance transparency over the
procurement process.
Our review of amounts reported by TCPS to DBM for fiscal year 2022 disclosed
that it only reported $18.7 million of the $33.6 million in vendor payments that
were required to be reported, a difference of $14.9 million. For example, TCPS
did not report payments related to certain healthcare and employee benefit
vendors. TCPS management advised that it misinterpreted the law when it
submitted the payment data for reporting to DBM.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that TCPS
a. establish procedures to ensure all vendor payments in aggregate of
$25,000 or greater are reported to DBM, as required; and
b. retroactively report the vendor payments that were not reported to DBM
for fiscal year 2022.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the TCPS budget.
According to TCPS’ records, fiscal year 2023 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $62.7 million, representing 79.2 percent of its total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2022-2023 school year TCPS had 681 full-time equivalent positions,
which consisted of 451 instructional and 230 non-instructional positions.
TCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
7 Local education agencies must report the name of the vendor receiving payment, the location of
the vendor by zip code, and the amount of the payment. Certain payments are excluded from this
requirement, including a public school employee’s compensation and a public school retiree’s
retirement allowance.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 4
TCPS had not obtained the Board’s review and approval of certain salary
scales and the salaries for four executive-level employees for which written
contracts were not prepared, as required by State law.
Analysis
TCPS had not obtained the Board’s review and approval of certain salary scales
as required by State law. In addition, written contracts for four executive-level
employees were not prepared and there was no evidence that the Board had
approved their salaries as required by State law. State law requires that the Board
appoint all system employees and set their salaries based on the recommendation
of the county superintendent.
• TCPS did not have documentation that the Board reviewed and approved the
2021-2023 salary scales for two of the three collective bargaining units which
covered 617 employees (such as, teachers and support personnel) as required
by State law. TCPS personnel advised that the salary scales were maintained
separately from the contracts and were not presented or approved by the
Board. According to TCPS records, as of June 30, 2023, payroll expenditures
for these employees totaled $33.9 million.
• Written agreements stipulating employment terms had not been prepared or
executed for four executive-level employees. Furthermore, there was no
documented salary scale or evidence the Board reviewed or approved these
salaries as required by law. The salaries for these four positions (excluding
fringe benefits) ranged from $131,000 to $158,000 and totaled $582,000 in
fiscal year 2023. TCPS personnel advised that salaries for these employees
were determined by the Superintendent through research of other school
systems, but this research was not documented. Our review of the salaries for
these employees disclosed that they were reasonable and comparable to other
similar sized school systems.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that TCPS adhere to State law by
a. obtaining the Board’s review and approval for all salary scales, and
b. ensuring employee compensation and benefits of executive-level
employees are documented in written agreements that are reviewed and
approved by the Board.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to TCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, and equipment) totaled $33.3
million as of June 30, 2023. TCPS maintains centralized automated records for
all equipment with a cost of $5,000 or more that are capitalized for financial
statement purposes. Control and recordkeeping of laptop computers assigned to
schools, students, and employees was maintained in a database by the Information
Technology Division (ITD) regardless of cost.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 5
through 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with TCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
TCPS employs a staff of 57 employees to maintain its 8 schools and a number of
other facilities (such as administrative and support offices). According to its
fiscal year 2025 Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to TCPS’ facilities over the next five
years are estimated to cost $14.3 million.
Our review of three construction-related procurements awarded during fiscal
years 2022 through 2023 totaling $4.2 million disclosed that the related services
were competitively procured. In addition, our test of six invoices totaling $2.3
million for these contracts disclosed that, generally, the invoices were properly
supported, reviewed and approved, and the amounts invoiced were in accordance
with contract terms.
However, two of the aforementioned construction contracts totaling $1.5 million
were procured using ICPAs and, as noted in Finding 1, not all related best
practices were followed. For example, for one of the construction contracts tested
totaling $1.4 million, TCPS had not obtained a copy of the contract pricing for
invoice verification. Additionally, as noted in Finding 2, TCPS does not always
submit contracts, including those procured using an ICPA, to the Board for
approval, and none of the three contracts tested were approved by the Board.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
TCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, TCPS provides scheduled maintenance of
its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing emergency repairs. In
addition, TCPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore area entities
to purchase energy at the best possible terms. TCPS also utilizes a vendor energy
management program to monitor and control heating and air conditioning usage
and a utility billing management system to monitor related costs.
TCPS also has written policies that include best practices that encourage both
students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use and monitors
building energy on a centralized basis. According to Consortium records (which
we did not audit), TCPS saved approximately $144,000 through energy cost
avoidance from fiscal years 2016 to 2023. Finally, TCPS makes use of
geothermal alternative energy sources.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Conclusion
Other than the issues referenced in Finding 1 and Finding 2 as noted above, our
audit did not disclose any other significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of TCPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, maintenance, and
energy management financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit
also did not disclose any other significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), TCPS has over 4,500 students eligible to receive student transportation
services. These students were transported using 47 system-owned buses. TCPS
reported that approximately 715,000 route miles were traveled to transport
students for the 2022-2023 school year. According to TCPS’ financial records,
fiscal year 2023 transportation costs totaled $3.3 million.
Finding 8
TCPS did not ensure that fuel rates charged by its fuel vendor agreed to the
related contract.
Analysis
TCPS did not ensure that fuel rates charged by its fuel vendor agreed to the
related contract prior to payment. TCPS purchased fuel for its fleet of vehicles
and buses through a Statewide contract, which specified pricing would be based
on rates published by a commercial service that tracks fuel prices. According to
its records, during fiscal years 2022 and 2023, TCPS made payments totaling
approximately $1.1 million for fuel purchases.
Our test of three invoices for fuel totaling approximately $50,000 (selected for the
two months of December 2023 and January 2024 since the rates per the
commercial service that tracks fuel prices were publicly available) disclosed that
TCPS could not provide documentation that it verified the propriety of the rates
charged on the invoices. Based on our review of the publicly available fuel
prices, we were able to confirm that the rates charged by the vendor were based
on the appropriate average price.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that TCPS ensure fuel rates invoiced agree to contract rates
by obtaining and retaining pricing information as specified in the contract.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 9
TCPS did not solicit bids or enter into written contracts when procuring bus
maintenance and certain contractor services.
Analysis
TCPS did not solicit bids when procuring bus maintenance and certain contractor
services or enter into contracts for these services. For example, TCPS did not
competitively bid or execute contracts for major bus repairs (such as brakes,
transmission, and tires) that could not be performed by TCPS bus maintenance
personnel. In fiscal year 2023, TCPS paid approximately $140,000 to two
vendors for bus maintenance. TCPS advised us that these vendors were selected
because they were local and familiar with the buses TCPS uses.
TCPS’ Procurement Policy requires two or more quotes to establish competitive
prices for purchases of $25,000 and under and a formal competitive bid process
for purchases exceeding $25,000. Similar conditions were commented upon in
our preceding report. TCPS’ response to our report indicated that corrective
actions would be taken by following their competitive procurement policies and
increasing in-house maintenance, reducing the need for external school bus
repairs. However, based on our review, TCPS did not take corrective actions as
indicated.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that TCPS
a. adhere to TCPS’ Procurement Policies for obtaining transportation
related services (repeat), and
b. ensure that formal contracts are executed (repeat).
Food Services
Background
According to TCPS' audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $3.3 million in fiscal year 2023 and were funded with federal
funds totaling $2.4 million, State funds totaling $175,000 and food sales totaling
$692,000. The federal funds are received from the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) based on an established rate per meals served. TCPS is
allowed to retain federal funds it receives in excess of its annual food service
operating costs to be used to offset certain future food service operating costs.
According to TCPS’ audited financial statements, the balance in TCPS’ Food
Services Fund totaled $1.6 million as of June 30, 2023.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Similar to other Maryland local education agencies, TCPS continued to serve
meals from certain schools during the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis by
providing free meals for parents and students to pick up. The number of meals
served increased by 90 percent from 398,134 in fiscal year 2021 to 756,327 in
fiscal year 2022. TCPS advised us that the increase was the result of students
returning to in-person classes after the COVID-19 pandemic, and because meals
were provided to all students at no cost during the 2021-2022 school year.
Food Services Management Contract
TCPS has a food services management contract (FSMC) with a third-party vendor
to manage its food service operations providing meal services to all 8 schools and
the central office. In July 2021, TCPS entered into a one-year contract with its
incumbent FSMC vendor, which included four additional one-year renewal
options. At the time of our review, one of the four options had been executed
which extended the contract through June 2023.
During fiscal years 2020 to 2023, TCPS paid the FSMC vendor approximately
$7.6 million, which included reimbursable costs related to food ($3 million) and
labor ($3.4 million), supplies and other miscellaneous expenses ($833,000), and
fixed management fees ($384,000). The fixed management fee, which includes
any vendor profit, was established and approved by MSDE at the beginning of
each contract year in accordance with USDA guidelines. The USDA guidelines
for schools contracting with food services management companies prohibit
vendors from receiving payments exceeding the vendor’s actual, net allowable
costs, plus any fixed fee.
Finding 10
TCPS did not obtain and review support for reimbursable food and labor
costs to ensure amounts invoiced by the FSMC vendor were supported and
complied with USDA guidelines.
Analysis
TCPS did not obtain and review support for reimbursable food and labor costs to
ensure amounts invoiced by the FSMC vendor were supported and complied with
USDA guidelines. We reviewed 5 of 12 monthly FSMC vendor invoices8
totaling $928,700 ($377,200 in food costs, $419,600 in labor costs, $61,500 in
miscellaneous expenses, and $70,400 in net management fees) paid to the FSMC
vendor during the 2022-2023 school year.
8 Selected based on materiality.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Our review disclosed that TCPS could not provide us with documentation to
support the amounts invoiced (such as payroll reports, to support labor charges
billed by the vendor). Rather, TCPS’ verification of the labor charges was
generally limited to reviewing system-wide monthly operating statements to
ensure that the amounts invoiced were comparable to prior periods and consistent
with the staffing plans established for TCPS’ schools.
In addition, TCPS did not review third-party food supplier invoices and could not
provide us with copies of third-party food supplier invoices. TCPS’ contract
required the vendor to maintain support for reimbursable food and labor costs and
allowed for TCPS to audit the records. However, TCPS did not conduct an audit
of the records to verify the amounts invoiced.
As a result, TCPS could not document that it ensured that amounts invoiced and
paid to the FSMC vendor represented actual, net allowable costs, plus any fixed
fee as required by USDA guidelines. We requested that TCPS obtain the detailed
documentation (such as payroll reports and supplier invoices) from the FSMC
vendor, but TCPS was unable to readily obtain the requested documentation.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that TCPS
a. establish contract requirements for the FSMC vendor to provide support
of reimbursable costs, and
b. perform a documented review of labor and food charges to ensure they
are supported and allowable in accordance with USDA guidelines.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Talbot County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of seven elected
members and two non-voting student members. The Board contracted with a
certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits of the TCPS
financial statements and federal programs. The Board also has established a
Citizen Advisory Council, which is a structured group that provides advice to the
Board on certain issues.
TCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that is applicable to both Board
members and TCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of interest
and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees. Specifically,
annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by Board members,
27

--- Page 30 ---
candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other administrators (such as
supervisors, school principals, and managers) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, TCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
three members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and TCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2022 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Finding 11
As of December 2023, TCPS had not implemented changes to its ethics
policies recommended by the State Ethics Commission in March 2022.
Analysis
As of December 6, 2023, certain requirements of State law were not incorporated
into TCPS ethics policies. In a letter dated March 22, 2022, the State Ethics
Commission (SEC) notified TCPS management that changes to its ethics policy
were necessary to comply with State law changes in 2017 and 2021 with new
conflict of interest provisions and additional disclosures required from employees
of local boards of education. For example, SEC management provided TCPS a
list of nine changes to improve disclosure of gifts, attributable interest in business
entities, compensation from entities doing business with the agency, and to
prohibit disclosure of confidential information by former officials or employees.
Prior to these law changes, SEC notified TCPS that its ethics policies conformed
to State law in a letter dated January 30, 2012.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that TCPS, in conjunction with the Board, revise its ethics
policies to conform with the requirements of State law.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
TCPS is a member of the Eastern Shore of Maryland Consortium for employee
and retiree health care. The Consortium members are self-insured for healthcare
costs up to a designated stop-loss amount of $250,000 per participant per plan
year. The Consortium contracts with a third-party administrator (TPA) for health
care claims processing services for employee medical (including prescription
costs), dental and vision, and for stop-loss insurance coverage. The TPA bills
TCPS monthly subscription charges based on the number of participants and their
28

--- Page 31 ---
medical coverage. Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them
on behalf of TCPS. TCPS pays its TPA an administrative fee for these services.
As of June 30, 2023, TCPS provided health insurance benefits to 2,006 enrolled
employees, dependents, and retirees. According to the TPA’s records for the plan
year ended August 31, 2023, TCPS health care expenditures totaled
approximately $8.2 million, administrative fees totaled $320,000, and stop-loss
insurance coverage totaled $813,000.
Finding 12
TCPS did not obtain and review claims data or verify the eligibility of
enrolled dependents and did not adequately monitor the performance of its
third-party administrator (TPA).
Analysis
TCPS did not obtain and review claims data or verify the eligibility of enrolled
dependents and did not adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrator.
• TCPS did not obtain support for the 2022 and 2023 annual settlement to the
TPA which totaled $425,000 and $335,000, respectively. In a year-end
settlement process, the TPA compares the medical claims it paid against the
monthly subscription charges paid by TCPS to determine any excess amount
due from or to be reimbursed. Our review disclosed that TCPS did not
receive detailed claims data from the TPA to verify the propriety of the
settlement amount.
• TCPS did not obtain documentation to ensure all enrolled dependents were
eligible to participate in the TCPS health plan or perform periodic audits to
ensure enrolled dependents were still eligible. TCPS employees must submit
documentation (such as birth certificates) for dependents they want added to
their health plan. Our test of 10 arbitrarily selected employees9 with
dependent insurance coverage disclosed that 6 employees had not provided
the required documentation to support the eligibility of their 18 dependents.
For example, two employees each with four dependents did not provide
supporting documentation (such as birth and marriage certificates) for any
dependents.
9 Test selection was made from all employees who were hired between August 2022 and August
2023.
29

--- Page 32 ---
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, TCPS stated that it would work with an independent
consultant to verify eligibility of participants and their dependents. Although
TCPS had established new dependent eligibility verification procedures and
enrollment documentation criteria, as noted above, such documentation was
not always obtained.
• TCPS did not audit, or otherwise verify, the accuracy of TPA self-reported
compliance with performance measures. The TPA health care contract
included 18 performance measures relating to implementation, network
maintenance, customer service, and claims processing. Additionally, the
contract allowed for the assessment of penalties up to $303,552 annually, if
the TPA did not meet the performance measures. The medical TPA reported
self-assessed penalties of $16,864 in calendar year 2022 based on its reported
compliance, but TCPS did not have a process to verify the TPA’s reported
compliance.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that TCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and any
additional information on the end of year settlement;
b. verify the eligibility of dependents claimed by enrolled health care
program participants (repeat); and
c. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Talbot County Public Schools
(TCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which generally
requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school systems to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management practices. In
accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, TCPS obtained an
exemption from the 6-year audit cycle covering fiscal years 2017 to 2022. This
performance audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the TCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the TCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of TCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas included revenue
and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements, human resources and
payroll, equipment control, information technology security and control, facilities,
transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the management of other
risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on TCPS dated July 17, 2013, was
limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of
the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the TCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
31

--- Page 34 ---
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by TCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
TCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of TCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2023.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
TCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the TCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
TCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
32

--- Page 35 ---
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to TCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
TCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to TCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from October 2023 to May 2024. TCPS’ response to
our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report.
Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity
findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise TCPS regarding the results of our review of its response.
33

--- Page 36 ---
APPENDIX
Talbot County Education Center
12 Magnolia St.
Easton, MD 21601
Phone: 410.822.0330
Fax: 410.820.4260
talbotschools.org
February 26, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed are the responses to recommendations made in the Financial Management Practices
Draft Audit Report for Talbot County Public Schools dated February 7, 2025. We have provided
a schedule indicating our concurrence with the recommendations and expected completion dates.
I would like to thank the legislative auditors for providing us feedback in several areas where we
can become a more efficient organization.
Please call me if you have any questions, or additional suggestions for our responses.
Sincerely,
Sarah E. Jones, CPA
Chief Financial Officer
Enclosures
Cc: Sharon M. Pepukayi, EdD, Superintendent of Schools
Sharon M. Pepukayi, Ed.D. Emily L. Jackson Amy R. Dodson
Superintendent of Schools President, Board of Education Vice President, Board of Education
Deborah L. Bridges Cynthia M. Jurrius Ann C. O’Connor Dyshekia W. M. Strawberry Karla L. Wieland-Cherry

--- Page 37 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into TCPS procurement policies and were not consistently used
when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements
(ICPA).
We recommend that TCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of TCPS will draft revisions to our board policy 4.6 Bidding Requirements
corrective action or and 4.7 Purchasing Procedures and related Administrative Regulations to
explain disagreement. incorporate best practices and to ensure compliance with current
Maryland procurement laws.
Page 1 of 13

--- Page 38 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
TCPS did not have a sufficiently comprehensive procurement policy and did
not comply with certain State procurement laws.
We recommend that TCPS
a. establish a comprehensive policy, approved by the Board, that governs
sole source procurements;
b. prepare written justifications when the sole source procurement method
is used;
c. obtain Board approval for sole source contracts totaling $25,000 or more
as required;
d. revise its procurement policies to require all competitively bid contracts
(regardless if the lowest bidder is selected) be submitted to the Board for
review and approval; and
e. ensure contract solicitations and awards are published on eMMA as
required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of TCPS will establish a comprehensive policy approved by the Board or
corrective action or related Administrative Regulation (“AR”) that governs sole source
explain disagreement.
procurements.
Recommendation 2b Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of TCPS will prepare written justification when the sole source
corrective action or procurement method is used for non-curriculum instructional contracts.
explain disagreement. Our policy does not apply to curriculum instructional contracts.
Recommendation 2c Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of TCPS will possibly recommend the increase of the $25,000 threshold
corrective action or when revising our Board Policy 4.6 Bidding Requirements and
explain disagreement.
Procedures and/or the related AR. TCPS will obtain Board approval for
sole source contracts that meet or exceed the dollar threshold established
under our new policy as required.
Page 2 of 13

--- Page 39 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2d Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of TCPS will revise Policy 4.6 and/or the related AR to require all
corrective action or competitively bid contracts be submitted to the Board for review and
explain disagreement. approval, regardless of whether the lowest bidder is selected.
Recommendation 2e Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of We recognize that the existing TCPS procurement policy does not
corrective action or comply with certain “best practices” and the state procurement law
explain disagreement. related to the eMMA posting requirement.
Page 3 of 13

--- Page 40 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
TCPS did not properly report all vendor payments in aggregate of $25,000 or
more to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), as required to
enhance transparency of the procurement process.
We recommend that TCPS
a. establish procedures to ensure all vendor payments in aggregate of
$25,000 or greater are reported to DBM, as required; and
b. retroactively report the vendor payments that were not reported to DBM
for fiscal year 2022.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of TCPS erroneously omitted from our report to DBM payments to
corrective action or providers of employee benefits such as our health insurance carrier, the
explain disagreement. Maryland State Retirement System, and our 403(b) plan providers. The
DBM instructions stipulate our report should omit payments to
employees. TCPS interpreted that incorrectly to include payments made
on behalf of employees as well such as withholdings and employer
contributions to insurance and retirement plans. TCPS will include all
payments to these vendors going forward.
Recommendation 3b Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of TCPS prepared a corrected report for the year 2022 which includes
corrective action or payments omitted from the original report and submitted that to DBM in
explain disagreement. December 2024.
Page 4 of 13

--- Page 41 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4
TCPS had not obtained the Board’s review and approval of certain salary
scales and the salaries for four executive-level employees for which written
contracts were not prepared, as required by State law.
We recommend that TCPS adhere to State law by
a. obtaining the Board’s review and approval for all salary scales, and
b. ensuring employee compensation and benefits of executive-level
employees are documented in written agreements that are reviewed and
approved by the Board.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide While they don’t sign the scales themselves, the TCPS Board signs the
additional comments as negotiated agreements which reference the salary scales. The Board
deemed necessary. directs the Negotiations Team who negotiate agreements for
compensation. The Board’s instructions to the Negotiations Team are
based on their careful consideration of our salary scales and other
benefits. After the negotiations process is complete, negotiated
agreements are presented to the Board for approval and contract
signature. The salary scales are attached to the negotiated agreements.
Recommendation 4a Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of The TCPS Board reviews our salary scales as part of its guidance to the
corrective action or Negotiations Committee and signs all negotiated agreements in the
explain disagreement. appropriate signature area indicating its approval of the terms of the
agreements, including changes to compensation such as percentage
increases or advancement of step(s). Beginning with the 2026
negotiated agreements, they will sign the actual scales themselves as
well.
Recommendation 4b Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of The compensation and benefits for the Superintendent are documented in
corrective action or an employment contract. Increases are approved through an annual
explain disagreement. performance evaluation which is performed by the Board and
documented. Per board policy 7.11 Salary Management, the
Superintendent has discretion over the compensation of executive-level
positions and Board approval is not required. The Superintendent has
historically adjusted annual salaries for executive level staff by applying
the same increase approved for other units subject to collective
bargaining after they are approved by the Board. Newly hired executive
Page 5 of 13

--- Page 42 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
level employees have been provided compensation in line with current
executive employees in our district or surrounding districts. While
TCPS has followed the board policy in the past, TCPS will obtain and
document Board approval for executive level compensation beginning
with the 2026 budget cycle.
Page 6 of 13

--- Page 43 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 5 through 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with TCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy, TCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and related
recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 7 of 13

--- Page 44 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 8
TCPS did not ensure that fuel rates charged by its fuel vendor agreed to the
related contract.
We recommend that TCPS ensure fuel rates invoiced agree to contract rates
by obtaining and retaining pricing information as specified in the contract.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide us
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8 Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
November
2024
Please provide details of TCPS performed periodic spot checks of some invoices to ensure fuel
corrective action or rates were correct but did not document those reviews or perform for all
explain disagreement. fuel invoices. TCPS has adjusted our practices to check that the pricing
charged on our invoices agrees to the rates specified in the DGS contract
though the Statewide Automated Fuel Dispensing and Management
System.
Page 8 of 13

--- Page 45 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
TCPS did not solicit bids or enter into written contracts when procuring bus
maintenance and certain contractor services.
We recommend that TCPS
a. adhere to TCPS’ Procurement Policies for obtaining transportation
related services (repeat), and
b. ensure that formal contracts are executed (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide TCPS adhered to our Board Policy 4.6 Bidding Requirements and
additional comments as related Administrative Regulation (“AR”) that only requires formal
deemed necessary. competitive bids for separate transactions that exceed the $25,000
threshold. While the total dollar amount related to the two referenced
vendors exceeded the $25,000 competitive procurement threshold, this
was the result of numerous transactions accumulated throughout the
entire school year, not singular transactions.
Recommendation 9a Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of TCPS will adhere to our revised Board Policy 4.6 Bidding Requirements
corrective action or and related AR. Formal contracts issued through a bid process would
explain disagreement. likely cause delays TCPS cannot afford to have with our limited bus
fleet. Most of our bus repair vendors are used not for routine repairs but
for emergency repairs. Thus, it would be difficult to bid this service out
in advance because often the work is repair specific (i.e. accident repairs,
mechanical failure, etc.) and at the time of the repair, time is of the
essence. Our Board Policy AR 4.6 Section II provides for Emergency
Purchasing Procedures to be used when an essential service has been
curtailed which is generally the case when a bus or vehicle breaks down.
TCPS will seek competitive quotes for routine or repetitive
repairs/service and negotiate unit pricing from our regular vendors when
practicable.
Recommendation 9b Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of We will amend our procurement practices to require a negotiated
corrective action or contract pricing structure for transportation vendors with whom it is
explain disagreement. likely a series of transactions during the school year will exceed our
competitive procurement threshold. As mentioned elsewhere, TCPS will
likely request the increase of that threshold beyond $25,000 when
revising our Board policy 4.6 and related AR.
Page 9 of 13

--- Page 46 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Food Service
Finding 10
TCPS did not obtain and review support for reimbursable food and labor
costs to ensure amounts invoiced by the FSMC vendor were supported and
complied with USDA guidelines.
We recommend that TCPS
a. establish contract requirements for the FSMC vendor to provide support
of reimbursable costs, and
b. perform a documented review of labor and food charges to ensure they
are supported and allowable in accordance with USDA guidelines.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10a Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details of TCPS’ contract with our Food Service Management Company (FSMC)
corrective action or specifies in Section 9 that they will provide customized reporting to suit
explain disagreement. our needs and that their accounting and reporting systems “account for
every penny that flows through the operation”. Thus, while our contract
already requires them to provide any requested documentation, TCPS
will review contract language at our next renewal in July 2025 to more
specifically indicate the specific support needed (i.e. reimbursable costs).
Recommendation 10b Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2025
Please provide details of TCPS will perform a periodic detailed review of labor and food costs
corrective action or from our FSMC to verify labor and food costs agree with underlying
explain disagreement. supporting documentation. Then TCPS will perform variance analysis,
ratio testing or other review of invoices in other months to provide
reasonable assurance that invoices are fairly charging for labor and food.
Page 10 of 13

--- Page 47 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
School Board Oversight
Finding 11
As of December 2023, TCPS had not implemented changes to its ethics
policies recommended by the State Ethics Commission in March 2022.
We recommend that TCPS, in conjunction with the Board, revise its ethics
policies to conform with the requirements of State law.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 11 Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
December
2024
Please provide details of Our Policy Committee and Board of Education reviewed our updated
corrective action or Ethics policy presented to them in November 2024. The Board
explain disagreement. approved these changes to policy at its December 2024 meeting. The
changes incorporate the items needed to conform with the requirements
of State law. The proposed changes to our policy were reviewed and
accepted by the State Ethics Commission in September 2024 in advance
of review by our own Ethics Committee.
Page 11 of 13

--- Page 48 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 12
TCPS did not obtain and review claims data or verify the eligibility of
enrolled dependents and did not adequately monitor the performance of its
third-party administrator (TPA).
We recommend that TCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and any
additional information on the end of year settlement;
b. verify the eligibility of dependents claimed by enrolled health care
program participants (repeat); and
c. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 12a Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of TCPS will investigate obtaining from our healthcare consulting firm
corrective action or additional supporting documentation and information for end-of-year
explain disagreement. settlement data that does not violate HIPPA privacy protections.
Recommendation 12b Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2027
Please provide details of While TCPS doesn’t believe that ineligible dependents receiving
corrective action or services constitute a significant risk, in 2024 TCPS launched a multi-
explain disagreement. year plan to increase documentation of dependents. TCPS audited the
verification documents previously received. During the 2024-2025
Open Enrollment, TCPS strongly encouraged staff to upload
documentation for dependents if they had not previously done so. TCPS
plans to continue this voluntary practice for the 2025-2026 and 2026-
2027 Open Enrollment cycles before making it a requirement to provide
documentation. TCPS encourages new hires to provide documentation of
dependents at their initial enrollment. When a covered employee has a
life event, they are asked to upload documentation such as a marriage,
Page 12 of 13

--- Page 49 ---
Talbot County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
birth, or death certificate as soon as possible. During the 2026-2027
year, TCPS will determine if a dependent eligibility audit is necessary.
Recommendation 12c Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2026
Please provide details of TCPS concurs with the need to better monitor the TPA’s compliance
corrective action or with reported performance measures and assess penalties when
explain disagreement. performance goals are not met. TCPS will work with our TPA to
implement a process to independently assess their performance.
Page 13 of 13

--- Page 50 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Anna M. Charocopos
Ali A. Dayya
Thomas J. Kraemer
Staff Auditors