Title: Maryland Department of Agriculture
Date: 03/13/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67d344b463664b461ab36717
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:16:44.166919
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Agriculture
March 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 13, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Agriculture (MDA) for the period beginning December 16, 2019 and ending
November 30, 2023. MDA’s primary purpose is to supervise, administer, and
promote agricultural activities throughout the State of Maryland.
Our audit disclosed MDA did not procure certain goods and services in
accordance with State procurement regulations. For example, MDA awarded four
sole source contracts totaling $403,000 to one vendor without preparing sole
source justifications. In addition, since MDA did not consolidate these
procurements, it circumvented Department of General Services and Board of
Public Works approval for these contracts. Additionally, MDA did not publish
the award for any of these contracts on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as
required.
Furthermore, we received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline related
to the Rural Maryland Council’s (RMC) reviews of grantees performance to
ensure grant funds were used as intended. Based on our review, we were able to
substantiate certain concerns raised in the allegation. Specifically, RMC did not
always receive and review grantee reports and did not document approval of
grantee extension requests (see Finding 2).
Our audit also disclosed that MDA had not established adequate controls over
certain product registrations and related collections, and its equipment inventory.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that MDA satisfactorily
addressed one of these findings. The remaining two findings (lack of controls
over certain product registrations and equipment inventory) are repeated in this
report. These two findings have been longstanding issues commented upon in our
preceding audit reports dating back to 2007 and 1990, respectively.
MDA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development 6
Corporation
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) did not 9
procure certain goods and services in accordance with State
procurement regulations.
Rural Maryland Council (RMC)
Finding 2 – RMC did not always receive and review grantee reports 11
and did not document approval of grantee extension requests.
Product Registrations
* Finding 3 – MDA did not adequately verify its product registration 12
collections were deposited, and did not ensure that certain product
registrations were proper.
Equipment
* Finding 4 – MDA did not conduct required physical inventories of its 14
equipment and did not maintain complete and accurate equipment
records.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) supervises, administers, and
promotes agricultural activities throughout the State of Maryland. Its mission is
to provide leadership and support agriculture and the citizens of Maryland by
conducting regulatory, services, and educational activities that assure consumer
confidence, protect the environment, and promote agriculture. MDA’s
responsibilities include providing planning assistance to farmers, protecting the
health of domestic animals (such as livestock), controlling insect pests, regulating
the use of pesticides, and implementing sound soil conservation methods. MDA
also inspects and grades agricultural commodities, oversees the practice of
veterinary medicine, and inspects the weighing and packaging of various
products. MDA consists of the following units:
 Office of the Secretary
 Office of Marketing, Animal Industries, and Consumer Services1
 Office of Plant Industries and Pest Management
 Office of Resource Conservation
According to State records, during fiscal year 2023, MDA’s expenditures totaled
$197.6 million, which included capital expenditures totaling $82.2 million. (see
Figure 1 on the following page). These expenditures were funded by general
funds totaling $42.6 million, special funds totaling $122 million, federal funds
totaling $8.9 million, and reimbursable funds totaling $23.9 million (see Figure 2
on page 6). MDA’s capital expenditures primarily related to the Maryland
Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF). MALPF is governed by a
Board of Trustees consisting of 13 members, purchases land easements with
General Obligation Bonds and Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
revenue, and places certain restrictions on the use of the land. For example, the
land may be restricted from subdivision for residential or commercial purposes.
1 Within the Office of Marketing, Animal Industries, and Consumer Services are the Rural
Maryland Council and the Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development
Corporation, whose operating expenditures in fiscal year 2023 totaled approximately $8.6
million and $6.7 million, respectively.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
MDA’s Expenditures Fiscal Year 2023
(amounts in millions)
Capital Expenditures
Resource
Conservation
$55.9
28% $82.2
41%
Plant Industries $13.4
and Pest 7%
Management
$34.9 $11.2
Marketing, Animal 18% 6%
Industries and Consumer Office of the Secretary
Services
Source: State financial records
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
MDA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 358 88.2%
Vacant2 48 11.8%
Total 406
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 37,510,432 18.9%
Technical and Special Fees 2,695,372 1.4%
Operating Expenses 157,429,253 79.7%
Total $197,635,057
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 42,655,920 21.6%
Special Fund 122,034,017 61.8%
Federal Fund 8,953,644 4.5%
Reimbursable Fund 23,991,476 12.1%
Total $197,635,057
Source: State financial and personnel records
Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry
Development Corporation
State law provides for an annual appropriation in MDA’s budget to fund the
Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation
(MARBIDCO). MARBIDCO was created by State law as a public corporation
and an instrumentality of the State. MARBIDCO provides grants and loans to
fulfill its mission to enhance the sustainability and profitability of the State’s
agricultural and resource-based industries.
2 A majority of MDA’s vacancies were in the Office of Resource Conservation. The findings
contained in our report did not specifically relate to this Office.
6

--- Page 9 ---
In accordance with State law, MARBIDCO engaged an independent public
accounting firm to perform audits of its financial statements for the fiscal years
ended June 30, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that these financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the MARBDICO as of June 30, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023,
and the changes in its net position and its cash flows for the year then ended, in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The allegation
referral related to the Rural Maryland Council’s (RMC) reviews of grantees
performance to ensure grant funds were used as intended. Based on our
determination of the associated risk, we interviewed applicable personnel and
reviewed applicable processes used by RMC to monitor grantee performance.
Based on our review, we were able to substantiate certain concerns raised in this
allegation (see Finding 2). However, the results of our review of the allegation
did not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated December 14, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 3
on the following page, we determined that MDA satisfactorily addressed one of
the three findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MDA had not established comprehensive procedures for Soil
Conservation Districts to perform inspections of farms in the
Cover Crop Program, did not adequately monitor the
Finding 1 Not repeated
inspections, and did not take required action when inspections
identified grantees that were noncompliant with the related
grant agreement.
MDA did not segregate duties for collections, and did not
Repeated
Finding 2 ensure that certain product registrations were proper and the
(Current Finding 3)
related fees were collected and deposited.
MDA’s physical inventory and equipment recordkeeping
Repeated
Finding 3 procedures were inadequate and were not in accordance with
(Current Finding 4)
State policy.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements and Disbursements
Background
According to State records, the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA)
processed disbursements totaling approximately $99.9 million through the State’s
Financial Management Information System (FMIS) during fiscal year 2023,
including $7.6 million in contractual services, materials and supplies, and
equipment which would generally be subject to State procurement regulations.
The majority of the remaining disbursements were for grants and property
easements and totaled $89.5 million.
Finding 1
MDA did not procure certain goods and services in accordance with State
procurement regulations.
Analysis
MDA did not procure certain goods and services in accordance with State
procurement regulations. We tested 10 procurements procured during fiscal years
2021 through 2024 collectively valued at $9.8 million and 24 payments related to
these procurements totaling $2.8 million.3
 MDA obtained services and paid a vendor $1.6 million for aerial pesticide
spraying services procured by a local jurisdiction without ensuring the
services were competitively procured and without a contract. These services
were used by MDA based under a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
with the local jurisdiction. MDA was not a party to the local jurisdiction’s
contract with the vendor and did not have documentation on whether the
contract was competitively procured. Additionally, because of the method
used to obtain these services, MDA did not obtain approval from the
Department of General Services (DGS) and the Board of Public Works
(BPW) as required for procurements in the amount paid to the vendor.
 MDA did not prepare a sole source justification for a $94,514 contract for
laboratory equipment maintenance services and did not publish the award on
3 We selected procurements to review in which MDA paid vendors material amounts without the
payments being posted to an approved purchase order or the amount paid was materially more
than the recorded purchase order. We tested material payments from the vendors selected to
review the procurement.
9

--- Page 12 ---
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)4 as required. MDA also did not
consolidate multiple procurements from this vendor. MDA awarded a total of
four sole source contracts totaling $403,000 to this vendor during the period
from July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2024. MDA did not prepare a sole source
justification or publish the award for any of these procurements.
The use of the sole source method for the aforementioned procurement did not
appear warranted because we identified other vendors that could provide the
services. In addition, since MDA did not consolidate these procurements, it
circumvented Department of General Services (DGS) and Board of Public
Works (BPW) approval and precluded its leverage as a high-volume
purchaser.
State procurement regulations provide that sole source procurements should only
be used when goods or services are available from only a single vendor, that a
written sole source justification be prepared, and awards exceeding $100,000 be
published on eMMA (prior to October 1, 2023 the amount was $50,000). The
regulations also require DGS approval for competitively procured contracts
totaling more than $100,000 and BPW approval for contracts totaling more than
$200,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDA comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that MDA
a. execute written contracts that include all relevant contract provisions;
b. ensure that written justifications are prepared for sole source
procurements and related awards are published on eMMA;
c. consolidate procurements to maximize State purchasing power; and
d. obtain DGS and BPW approval as required, including retroactive
approval for the laboratory equipment maintenance and aerial pesticide
spraying services contracts noted above.
Rural Maryland Council
Background
In accordance with the Economic Development Article §13-404, the Rural
Maryland Council (RMC) is an independent unit of the State and is organized
under MDA for administrative and budgetary purposes. The RMC is governed by
a board, of up to 45 members, that consists of representation from the federal,
4 eMMA is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
10

--- Page 13 ---
State, county and municipal governments, as well as the for-profit and nonprofit
sectors.
RMC administers two grant programs, the Maryland Agricultural Education and
Rural Development Assistance Fund Program (MAERDAF) and the Rural
Maryland Prosperity Investment Fund (RMPIF).5 According to RMC records, it
awarded 84 grants with total grant awards totaling $8.4 million during fiscal year
2023.
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that a
grantee did not use funds as intended for a specific project. Our review
substantiated certain aspects of the allegation. Our review did not identify any
matters that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal
Division but did identify certain deficiencies that require corrective action by
RMC, in conjunction with MDA, as further described in the finding below.
Finding 2
RMC did not always receive and review grantee reports and did not
document approval of grantee extension requests.
Analysis
RMC did not always receive and review grantee programmatic and financial
reports and did not document approval of grantee extension requests. According
to RMC’s Grant Guidelines and Criteria, grantees are required to complete
projects funded by RMC’s grant awards within one fiscal year and submit an
interim and a final report in January and July, respectively. RMC uses these
reports to help ensure the grant awards were used as intended by the grantee.
We performed an analysis of a tracking spreadsheet that RMC used to monitor
fiscal year 2023 grantee information (such as award amounts and grantee reports).
Our analysis noted that as of March 2024, 13 of the 79 grantees with grant awards
totaling $461,000, had not submitted interim and/or final reports to RMC for
periods ranging from 70 to 419 days after the report’s due date. In addition, RMC
had not documented that it reviewed the final report for 26 awards totaling
approximately $2.6 million. As a result, there is a lack of assurance that the
grantees used the funds in accordance with the related grant agreement and/or
whether any funds are required to be returned to RMC.
5 The MAERDAF provides grants to rural-serving nonprofit organizations that promote statewide
and regional planning; economic and community development; and agricultural and forestry
education. The RMPIF provides grants that help raise the overall standard of living in rural areas
to a level that meets or exceeds statewide benchmark averages while preserving the cultural
heritage and rural way of life.
11

--- Page 14 ---
RMC also did not always document its grant review board’s approval of grant
extensions. We tested 4 grants totaling approximately $1 million (one grant
totaling $52,506 referenced in the aforementioned allegation, and three other
grants totaling $971,000 based on materiality) awarded during fiscal years 2019,
2021, and 2023. Our test disclosed that RMC granted extensions of more than
one year for 3 grants totaling $523,500 without a documented approval from its
grant review board.
For example, the grantee noted in the allegation received a $52,500 grant in fiscal
year 2019 to build a greenhouse but as of September 2024, had not completed the
project despite providing documentation that it had purchased the necessary
materials. RMC approved an extension for the grantee to complete the
greenhouse, and followed up with the grantee on multiple occasions, but had not
recovered any of the funds despite the ongoing lack of progress on the project.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that RMC, in conjunction with MDA,
a. ensure grantees submit required reports and perform reviews of reports
in a timely manner and determine if any grant funds should be recovered,
and
b. document the decisions made by the grant review board on grantee
extensions.
Product Registrations
Finding 3
MDA did not adequately verify its product registration collections were
deposited, and did not ensure that certain product registrations were proper.
Analysis
MDA had not established adequate controls over cash receipts and certain product
registrations. MDA’s collections are primarily related to registration and
inspection fees, and agricultural transfer taxes. According to State records during
fiscal year 2023, MDA collections totaled approximately $37 million, which
included electronic collections (credit card, bank lockbox, and other collections)
totaling $33.2 million and check collections totaling $3.8 million.
Checks were received in the mail by various MDA units and then transferred to
MDA’s Fiscal Services Office for centralized deposit. We reviewed procedures
and controls over cash receipts and related registrations processed by the Fiscal
12

--- Page 15 ---
Services Office and at one MDA unit (State Chemist Section) that received
collections totaling $289,000 during fiscal year 2023.
 MDA did not independently reconcile the value of product registrations (such
as for commercial feed and pesticides) issued by the State Chemist Section
with the corresponding collections deposited by the Fiscal Services Office, to
ensure that the proper amounts were collected and deposited for all
registrations issued by the section. Our test of four days of arbitrarily selected
product registration collections totaling $4,280 disclosed that the proper
amounts were collected.
 MDA did not use available system output reports to ensure that all product
registrations were subject to supervisory review. Although a supervisor in the
State Chemist Section reviewed and approved product registration
applications recorded in the system prior to final issuance, MDA did not
ensure all registrations issued were subject to review. Two employees had
full system access to issue registrations, and therefore it is critical that a
system report be reviewed to ensure the propriety of issued registrations.
According to MDA records, as of April 24, 2024, there were 32,025 active
product registrations in the State Chemist Section.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual6 requires that the
total value of registrations issued be reconciled with the total collections received
for those registrations. The Manual also requires reconciliation of collections
from the initial records to the amounts deposited.
The lack of an independent reconciliation of the registrations has been
commented upon in our five preceding audit reports dating back to 2007 and the
lack of an independent supervisory review of registrations has been commented
upon in our three preceding audit reports dating back to 2013. In its response to
our preceding audit report, MDA stated that it established a process to reconcile
the total value of the registrations issued with the revenue deposited in the State’s
accounting system and implemented a new registration system to address the
approval of registrations. As noted above, the reconciliations were not being
performed and although a new registration system was implemented, it does not
require supervisory review and approval.
6 The updated Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual, effective June 2024, has the same
requirements.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDA
a. independently reconcile the total value of registrations issued and fees
collected according to its records with the related revenues deposited
(repeat), and
b. establish a process for independent supervisory review and approval of
registrations issued by an employee independent of the registration
process (repeat).
Equipment
Finding 4
MDA did not conduct required physical inventories of its equipment and did
not maintain complete and accurate equipment records.
Analysis
MDA’s physical inventory and equipment recordkeeping procedures were not in
accordance with the Department of General Services (DGS) Inventory Control
Manual. According to MDA’s records, its equipment inventory as of March 20,
2024 totaled approximately $10 million.
 Physical inventories of certain sensitive and non-sensitive equipment were not
performed as required. As of March 2024, there were 4,047 sensitive items
with a recorded cost of approximately $4 million that had not been inventoried
within one year as required and the majority had not been inventoried within
the last three years. In addition, as of March 2024, there were 5,564 non-
sensitive items with a recorded cost of $6 million that had not been
inventoried within three years as required.
 Equipment items were not always properly recorded in the detailed records, as
required. Our test of 10 equipment purchases totaling approximately $1
million (selected based on materiality) made between August 2019 and
September 2023, disclosed that for 8 of the purchases, 24 equipment items
totaling approximately $685,000, had not been recorded in the detail records
as of March 2024. We also noted 121 sensitive items (such as thermometers
and cameras) totaling $42,600 that had been incorrectly classified in the detail
records as non-sensitive even though they met the criteria for sensitive items.
These conditions were caused, at least in part, because MDA did not establish
written procedures as required by the DGS Inventory Control Manual. The
Manual also requires, sensitive equipment to be inventoried annually, non-
14

--- Page 17 ---
sensitive equipment to be inventoried every three years, and detailed records be
properly maintained.
Similar conditions regarding accountability and control over equipment have been
commented on in our 10 preceding audit reports dating back to 1990. In its
response to our preceding audit report, MDA stated that it had developed
procedures to ensure assets were appropriately accounted for. However, MDA
employees could not document that it developed the procedure. Considering the
number of years over which these conditions have gone uncorrected, MDA should
consider seeking assistance from DGS for establishing, monitoring, and
maintaining compliance with the aforementioned Manual requirements.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDA
a. comply with the Inventory Control Manual requirements (repeat); and
b. seek specific assistance from DGS for establishing, monitoring, and
maintaining compliance with those requirements (repeat).
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Agriculture (MDA) for the period beginning December 16, 2019 and ending
November 30, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on our assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, cash receipts,
grants, budgetary closeout transactions, corporate purchasing cards, and
equipment. In addition, we examined the Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Fund, the Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry
Development Corporation, and the Rural Maryland Council (RMC).
Furthermore, we reviewed RMC’s grant activity based on a referral to our fraud,
waste, and abuse hotline. Finally, we determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 16, 2019 to November 30, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
16

--- Page 19 ---
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
17

--- Page 20 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MDA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDA regarding the results of
our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
MDA did not procure certain goods and services in accordance with State
procurement regulations.
We recommend that MDA comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that MDA
a. execute written contracts that include all relevant contract provisions;
b. ensure that written justifications are prepared for sole source
procurements and related awards are published on eMMA;
c. consolidate procurements to maximize State purchasing power; and
d. obtain DGS and BPW approval as required, including retroactive
approval for the laboratory equipment maintenance and aerial pesticide
spraying services contracts noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide MDA is currently hiring a new Procurement Officer, who will take the
additional comments as lead in the Department’s efforts to correct these deficiencies.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/25
Please provide details of This has been communicated to all of the MDA units and is being
corrective action or included in all contracts going forward.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/25
Please provide details of This has been communicated to all of the MDA units. All future sole
corrective action or source procurements will include written justifications and be published
explain disagreement. on eMMA.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/25
Please provide details of This has been communicated with all of the MDA units and will be
corrective action or implemented going forward.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/25
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of This has been communicated to all of the MDA units and will be
corrective action or implemented going forward. The Department is still reviewing the two
explain disagreement. retroactive approvals with the Office of the Attorney General to
determine the appropriate actions that are needed to comply with this
recommendation.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Rural Maryland Council
Finding 2
RMC did not always receive and review grantee reports and did not
document approval of grantee extension requests.
We recommend that RMC, in conjunction with MDA,
a. ensure grantees submit required reports and perform reviews of reports
in a timely manner and determine if any grant funds should be recovered,
and
b. document the decisions made by the grant review board on grantee
extensions.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide This report and recommendations have been shared with RMC. MDA is
additional comments as coordinating with RMC to ensure these deficiencies are corrected.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/25
Please provide details of MDA will work with RMC to ensure the grantee reports are submitted
corrective action or and reviewed consistent with RMC’s Grant Guidelines and Criteria.
explain disagreement. Any grant funds that should be recovered will be identified through the
timely submission and review of grantee reports.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/25
Please provide details of MDA will work with RMC to ensure its grant review boards approve
corrective action or grant extensions and document this approval.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Product Registrations
Finding 3
MDA did not adequately verify its product registration collections were
deposited, and did not ensure that certain product registrations were proper.
We recommend that MDA
a. independently reconcile the total value of registrations issued and fees
collected according to its records with the related revenues deposited
(repeat), and
b. establish a process for independent supervisory review and approval of
registrations issued by an employee independent of the registration
process (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/25
Please provide details of MDA has established a process to reconcile the total value of
corrective action or registrations issued with revenue deposited. The Department will ensure
explain disagreement. that these reconciliations happen on a consistent basis.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/25
Please provide details of MDA has implemented a new registration system to address the
corrective action or approval of registrations. MDA will use the available system output
explain disagreement. reports to ensure that all product registrations are subject to supervisory
review.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Equipment
Finding 4
MDA did not conduct required physical inventories of its equipment and did
not maintain complete and accurate equipment records.
We recommend that MDA
a. comply with the Inventory Control Manual requirements (repeat); and
b. seek specific assistance from DGS for establishing, monitoring, and
maintaining compliance with those requirements (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide MDA recently hired a new Director of Central Services, who will take
additional comments as the lead in the Department’s efforts to correct these deficiencies.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/25
Please provide details of MDA will review all of our procedures to ensure compliance with the
corrective action or Inventory Control Manual. The Department will establish written
explain disagreement. procedures consistent with the Inventory Control Manual.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/25
Please provide details of MDA is committed to having an up-to-date accounting of the entire
corrective action or inventoried assets of the Department and we will coordinate directly
explain disagreement. with DGS for assistance in establishing, monitoring, and maintaining
compliance with the requirements of the Inventory Control Manual.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Walter L. Horan IV
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditors
Keli R. Edmonds
Albert S. Kim
Timothy Moon
Staff Auditors