Title: Maryland Stadium Authority
Date: 03/21/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67dddf365f45c6bd9c918e52
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:17:41.786515
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Stadium Authority
March 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 21, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Stadium Authority
(MSA) for the period beginning October 1, 2020 and ending May 31, 2024. MSA
is primarily responsible for developing, constructing, and maintaining certain
facilities (such as public schools, sports facilities, convention centers, and
entertainment venues) as authorized by law.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MSA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) is an instrumentality of the State of
Maryland, a public corporation, and an independent unit of state government.
MSA is governed by an eleven-member board, with one member each appointed
by the Mayor of Baltimore City and County Executive of Prince George’s
County, and seven members appointed by the Governor, subject to the advice and
consent of the Senate. The President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House
of Delegates each nominate one of the remaining two members.1 The members
serve four-year terms and the board appoints an Executive Director (subject to the
approval of the Governor) who is responsible for directing and supervising the
administrative affairs and activities of MSA.
MSA is responsible for developing, constructing, and maintaining certain
facilities (such as public schools, sports facilities, convention centers, and
entertainment venues). In addition, MSA is authorized to perform planning and
construction-related activities for State agencies or local governments, subject to
certain notification requirements of the General Assembly.
According to MSA’s audited financial statements and the State’s records, MSA’s
expenditures during fiscal year 2023 totaled approximately $536 million
including $517.1 million in operating expenses primarily for construction and
renovation projects (see Figure 1 on the following page).
1 Chapter 17, Laws of Maryland 2022, and Chapter 112, Laws of Maryland 2023, changed the
composition of the Board of Directors by increasing the number of board members from seven to
eleven. The 2022 legislation added one appointee from the Senate and the House, and the 2023
legislation added one appointee from the Governor and one from the Prince George’s County
Executive.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
MSA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 125 99.2%
Vacant 1 0.8%
Total 126
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 18,483,449 3.4%
Technical and Special Fees 424,295 0.1%
Operating Expenses 517,112,948 96.5%
Total $536,020,692
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 20,910,416 3.9%
Special Fund 47,102,307 8.8%
Non-Budgeted Fund 449,563,660 83.9%
Capital Appropriation 18,444,309 3.4%
Total $536,020,692
Source: State financial and personnel records and MSA financial statements
Agency Budget Oversight
The Economic Development Article, Section 10-623(1) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland specifies that MSA’s annual budget be submitted to the Department of
Budget and Management for inclusion in the State budget book for informational
purposes. Oversight by the Board of Public Works for certain MSA budgeting
matters is established in the master lease and sublease agreements that exist
between MSA and the State for the various MSA facilities. Under the master
leases, the State leases the land and all facilities constructed thereon from MSA.
Under the subleases, MSA leases the facilities back from the State.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Statement Audits
MSA engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to audit its
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2022, and 2023. In
the related audit reports, the firm stated that MSA’s financial statements present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of MSA as of June 30, 2021,
2022, and 2023 and the respective changes in its financial position and cash flows
for the years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MSA’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to
MSA.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MSA. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Stadium Authority
(MSA) for the period beginning October 1, 2020 and ending May 31, 2024. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
5

--- Page 8 ---
addressed by the audit included construction projects, bond trustee accounts,
purchases and disbursements, payroll, and cash receipts.
MSA engages an independent accounting firm to audit its annual financial
statements. In the related audit reports for fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2022,
and 2023 the firm stated that MSA’s financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of MSA as of June 30, 2021, 2022, and
2023, and the respective changes in financial position and cash flows thereof for
the years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted
in the United States of America. We have relied on the work of the independent
accounting firm to provide audit coverage pertaining to debt issuances and the
related amortization, and certain payroll activity. Our audit procedures in those
areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that
reliance.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on MSA’s procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 1, 2020 to May 31, 2024, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
6

--- Page 9 ---
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from MSA’s internal accounting system for the purpose of
testing payments for construction projects financed from bond issuances. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MSA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
MSA managed a building replacement project for the Department of Legislative
Services that was completed in January 2025, including procurement of contracts
related to the project. In addition, beginning in September 2021 our Office leased
office space in the Warehouse at Camden Yards, which is managed by MSA. In
our opinion, the contractual nature of these relationships did not impair our
independence during our audit of MSA.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Kareem R. Jackson
Owen M. Long-Grant
Timothy Moon
Staff Auditors