Title: Maryland Department of Health - Vital Statistics Administration
Date: 03/19/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67e186548a238967f05a730b
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:17:22.398729
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Vital Statistics Administration
March 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 19, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Vital Statistics
Administration (VSA) of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the
period beginning January 16, 2020 and ending January 15, 2024. VSA is
primarily responsible for registering all births and deaths occurring in the State;
issuing certified copies of birth, death, and marriage certificates; and compiling
and analyzing various vital statistics data. During the audit period VSA had a
significant vacancy rate, which may have contributed, at least in part, to the
findings in this report.
Our audit disclosed that in 2019, VSA initiated a major information technology
development project for the Integrated Electronic Vital Records Registration
System (IEVRRS). We noted that VSA did not adequately monitor the IEVRRS
project management vendor and was unable to provide sufficient details justifying
a $16 million (122 percent) increase to the project costs and a 4-year delay in the
estimated project completion date.
Our audit also noted that VSA did not obtain support for amounts invoiced and
paid to IEVRRS vendors and made payments totaling $53,000 that were not in
accordance with the related contract. For example, VSA did not obtain
documentation to support eight payments to three vendors totaling $1.6 million
for the reimbursement of payroll costs.
In addition, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before

--- Page 4 ---
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Furthermore, we noted VSA did not review manual changes to birth records and
did not establish adequate controls over collections. For example, VSA did not
ensure Local Health Departments remitted fees collected on behalf of VSA
resulting in the failure to identify and recover at least $376,000.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that VSA satisfactory addressed two of those three
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of VSA, is included as an appendix to
this report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MDH’s
response related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response
and noted general agreement to our findings and related recommendations. Based
on our review of the written responses and additional clarification obtained from
MDH, we believe the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all
audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by VSA. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and VSA’s willingness to
address the audit issues and to implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Maryland Electronic Vital Records Registration Systems 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Integrated Electronic Vital Records Registration Systems (IEVRRS)
Finding 1 – VSA did not adequately monitor the IEVRRS project 10
management vendor to ensure that the project was completed on
budget and on time. The project costs have increased by $16 million
and the projected completion date has been delayed by four years.
Finding 2 – VSA did not obtain support for amounts invoiced and paid to 11
IEVRRS vendors. In addition, VSA made payments totaling $53,000
that were not in accordance with the related contract, including
overpayments totaling $28,000.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 12
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 12
Birth Records
Finding 5 – VSA did not review manual changes to birth records on its 12
Electronic Birth Registration System.
Local Health Departments (LHDs)
Finding 6 – VSA did not ensure LHDs remitted fees collected on behalf 13
of VSA for certified copies of birth and death certificates resulting in
the failure to identify and recover at least $376,000.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 7 –VSA had not established adequate procedures and controls 14
over certificate fee collections received at its headquarters.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 19
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of
January 2025
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) Vital Statistics Administration
(VSA) is responsible for registering all births and deaths occurring in the State;
issuing certified copies of birth, death, and marriage certificates; and compiling
and analyzing various vital statistics data. Certified copies of these certificates
are available, for a fee, at the VSA headquarters location in Baltimore, at 22 local
health departments (LHDs),1 at 7 Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA)
branches,2 and through the mail, phone, and VSA’s website.
According to the State’s records, during calendar year 2024, VSA’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $6.6 million, as shown in Figure 1 on the
following page. During the period June 30, 2020 through June 30, 2024, VSA
had vacancy rates that ranged from 8.6 percent to 26.4 percent. These vacancies
may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
1 LHDs in Baltimore City and Baltimore County do not issue copies of birth and death certificates.
Individuals in these jurisdictions can request copies of certificates from VSA’s Division of Vital
Records located in Baltimore City.
2 Certified copies of birth certificates can be issued for the purpose of obtaining a driver’s license
at the following MVA branches: Annapolis, Baltimore City, Essex, Frederick, Gaithersburg,
Largo, and Salisbury.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
Vital Statistics Administration
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 76 71.7%
Frozen3 2 1.9%
Vacant 28 26.4%
Total 106
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $5,088,038 77.7%
Technical and Special Fees 699,723 10.7%
Operating Expenses 762,785 11.6%
Total $6,550,546
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $5,186,021 79.2%
Special Fund 1,150 0.0%
Federal Fund 1,324,596 20.2%
Reimbursable Fund 38,779 0.6%
Total $6,550,546
Source: State financial and personnel records
Maryland Electronic Vital Records Registration Systems
According to VSA management, the Electronic Birth Registration System (EBRS)
and the Work Order Management System (WOMS) went live in May 2023, which
were parts of VSA’s Integrated Electronic Vital Records Registration Systems
(IEVRRS). VSA also maintains the Electronic Death Registration System
(EDRS), which is also a part of IEVRRS.
3 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Agencies
were not authorized to fill frozen positions according to budgetary instructions from the
Department of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not
been filled since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
6

--- Page 9 ---
 EBRS is primarily used by medical facilities for the registration of births4
and by VSA for making manual adjustments to the records.
 WOMS is used by VSA and LHDs to issue certified copies of certificates,
such as birth5 and death certificates and/or for preparing reports of vital
statistics data.
 EDRS is primarily used by medical certifiers, funeral directors, and VSA
for the registration of deaths.
The Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary and the Department
of Human Services – Office of the Secretary are responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the network supporting IEVRRS.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 10, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2
on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined
that VSA satisfactorily addressed two of those three findings. The remaining
finding is repeated in this report.
4 The term registration of births is the process of inputting information, such as, parents’ name,
birthdate, and address into EBRS to enable VSA to issue a birth certificate.
5 As noted on page 5, MVA issues certified copies of birth certificates on a limited basis.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Vital Statistics Administration (VSA)
Finding 1 did not require that documentation
(Policy supporting the propriety of certified copies Not Repeated
Issue) of birth certificates issued be retained and
reviewed by supervisors.
VSA did not have sufficient procedures to
ensure local health department (LHD) site
visits were comprehensive and
Finding 2 documented. In addition, the results of the Not Repeated
site visits were not formally communicated
to the LHDs and related corrective action
plans were not received.
VSA maintained sensitive personally
Status Redacted6
Finding 3 identifiable information in a manner that
did not provide adequate safeguards.
VSA had not established adequate
Repeated
Finding 4 procedures and controls over collections
(Current Finding 7)
from certificate fees.
6 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Integrated Electronic Vital Records Registration System
(IEVRRS)
Background
In 2019, VSA initiated a major information technology development project
(MITDP) for the Integrated Electronic Vital Records Registration System
(IEVRRS). The IEVRRS was to operate on the Maryland Total Human Services
Integrated Network (MD THINK) platform7 with the following functions:
 allow secure web-based entry of all births and deaths;
 import marriage and divorce records;
 support the search, retrieval, and issuance of certificates;
 track the acceptance fees and the use of security paper;
 integrate with Maryland’s Electronic Death Registration System (EDRS);
 support user accounts at all Maryland medical and funeral facilities;
 enable search and issuance capabilities for use by local health departments
(LHDs) and Motor Vehicle Administrations (MVA); and
 allow for the export of new records in specific formats for electronic transfer
to the National Center for Health Statistics and the sending of social security
numbers to/from the Social Security Administration.
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT), assisted with the
procurement of four vendors that were responsible for project design,
development, implementation, and management. DoIT delegated to VSA the
responsibility of monitoring the vendors to ensure the project was on budget and
on time and to annually report the project status to DoIT. VSA used task orders
from a DoIT master contract for one of the aforementioned four vendors to
provide project management to fulfill VSA’s monitoring and reporting
responsibilities. As of June 30, 2023, expenditures for IEVRRS totaled $10.5
million and the estimated total project costs was $29.1 million with an estimated
completion date in fiscal year 2027.
7 IEVRRS is a VSA owned application hosted on the shared MD THINK cloud platform operated
by the Maryland Department of Human Services.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
VSA did not adequately monitor the IEVRRS project management vendor to
ensure that the project was completed on budget and on time. As of June 30,
2023, the projected IEVRRS budget costs have increased by $16 million and
the projected completion date has been delayed by four years.
Analysis
VSA did not adequately monitor the IEVRRS project management vendor and
was unable to provide sufficient details justifying a $16 million (122 percent)
increase to the project costs and a 4-year delay in the estimated project
completion date.
Our review of the MITDP Annual Reports prepared by the project management
vendor for calendar years 2019 to 2023, disclosed that the IEVRRS’ estimated
cost to complete increased by $16 million or 122 percent, from the initial amount
of $13.1 million to $29.1 million, and the estimated completion date was extended
from 2023 to 2027. While VSA provided general information related to $10.2
million of this increase, such as, resolving issues with obtaining computer
equipment, VSA could not provide documentation of the specific increased costs
and additional time related to the project changes. Furthermore, VSA could not
explain and lacked documentation supporting the remaining $5.8 million increase.
The inability to monitor the project manager vendor may have been caused, at
least in part, because VSA did not track payments to ensure they did not exceed
the related task orders. In this regard, tracking these payments was difficult
because they were made by several entities including the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) and DoIT.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that VSA
a. monitor the project management vendor including obtaining and
reviewing explanations for significant changes, such as increases in
estimate costs and time to complete the project; and
b. coordinate with MDH and DoIT to track payments made to the project
management vendor to ensure that they do not exceed the related task
orders.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
VSA did not obtain support for amounts invoiced and paid to IEVRRS
vendors. In addition, VSA made payments totaling $53,000 that were not in
accordance with the related contract, including overpayments totaling
$28,000.
Analysis
VSA did not obtain support for amounts invoiced and paid to IEVRRS vendors
and made payments totaling $53,000 that were not in accordance with the related
contract. We tested 12 payments8 totaling approximately $1.9 million made
during the period from July 2020 to August 2023. Our test disclosed the
following:
 VSA did not obtain documentation to support eight payments to three vendors
totaling $1.6 million for the reimbursement of payroll costs. Specifically, the
vendors did not provide VSA with payroll records or receipts to support the
invoices.
 VSA made three payments totaling approximately $744,000 to one vendor of
which $53,000 was not in accordance with the related contract. Specifically,
the three payments included overpayments to the vendor which totaled
$28,000. In this regard, while the contract established a rate of $140 per hour;
the vendor billed and VSA paid up to $236 per hour. Additionally, VSA paid
this same vendor for overhead totaling $25,000 that was not authorized in the
contract.
Recommendation 2
We recommend VSA
a. obtain documentation, such as payroll records and receipts to support
amounts invoiced;
b. ensure payments, such as labor rates and overhead are in accordance
with the approved contract; and
c. take appropriate action, such as recouping payments that were not in
accordance with the contract terms, including those noted above.
8 We arbitrarily selected 3 payments from each of the 4 vendors.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 3 and 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDH’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Birth Records
Finding 5
VSA did not review manual changes to birth records on EBRS.
Analysis
VSA did not perform reviews of manual changes in EBRS to birth records, such
as name changes. The changes generally require a court order and are processed
by VSA employees. According to VSA’s records, during the period from July
2023 through December 2023, 25 VSA employees processed 13,783 changes to
birth records. VSA advised that, as of February 2024, no reviews were performed
since June 2023 and VSA could not document reviews conducted prior to this
period. Our test of 10 arbitrarily selected changes that were processed between
July 2022 and December 2023, concluded that the changes were accurately
recorded and properly supported.
This condition was caused, at least in part, because VSA did not have written
procedures for reviewing the manual changes. Such procedures should include
the number and frequency of the reviews, and the documentation required to
support the changes.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that VSA
a. review manual changes to birth records; and
b. establish written procedures for reviewing manual changes, including the
frequency and number of changes to review and the level of
documentation required to support the changes.
Local Health Departments (LHDs)
Finding 6
VSA did not ensure LHDs remitted fees collected on behalf of VSA for
certified copies of birth and death certificates resulting in the failure to
identify and recover at least $376,000.
Analysis
VSA did not ensure LHDs remitted fees collected on behalf of VSA for certified
copies of birth and death certificates resulting in the failure to identify and recover
at least $376,000. VSA has a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with each
of the 22 LHDs9 to issue certified copies of birth and death certificates to
authorized applicants and to collect the related fees on its behalf. The MOU
requires the LHDs to provide VSA with monthly reports of these collections.
VSA uses the reports to submit information to the Maryland Department of
Health’s General Accounting Division to transfer funds from the LHDs to VSA.
According to its records, VSA received approximately $969,000 from fees
collected by the LHDs during the period July 2023 through December 2023.
Our review of activity for the 22 LHDs between July 2023 and December 2023
disclosed that, as of April 2024, 16 LHD’s did not submit the required reports for
at least one month, including 2 LHDs (Prince George’s County and Somerset
County) which had not submitted the required reports since September 2022 and
June 2019, respectively. Our review also disclosed that VSA did not follow-up
with the LHDs to obtain the missing reports and did not use output reports from
WOMS to identify certificates issued by these LHDs to calculate the amounts
due.
As a result, we determined that VSA did not receive approximately $376,000 for
the certificate fees collected by these LHDs during the period of July 2023
through December 2023. We were unable to readily determine the total amount
9 LHDs in Baltimore City and Baltimore County do not issue copies of birth and death
certificates. Individuals in these jurisdictions can request copies of certificates from VSA’s
Division of Vital Records located in Baltimore City.
13

--- Page 16 ---
of unremitted fees because VSA management advised that the records needed to
determine the amount of funds due and collected prior to May 2023 were not
readily available.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that VSA
a. obtain LHD collection information either from the LHDs or through
utilizing output reports from WOMS to determine amounts not provided
to VSA, including those noted in the analysis above; and
b. collect amounts due from LHDs, including the aforementioned $376,000.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
VSA had not established adequate procedures and controls over certificate
fee collections received at its headquarters.
Analysis
VSA had not established adequate procedures and controls over birth, death, and
marriage certificate fees received at its headquarters. According to State records,
headquarters certificate fees totaled approximately $4.4 million during calendar
year 2023, including $1 million of cash and checks received in person or in the
mail and $3.4 million received via credit card. For example, we noted the
following:
 Collections received in the mail were not restrictively endorsed or initially
recorded immediately upon receipt. Rather, checks were handled by at least
two employees prior to being endorsed and recorded.
 Collections were routinely left unattended on an employee’s desk until they
were forwarded to a second employee for endorsement and recordation.
 VSA did not independently verify that cash and check collections were
subsequently deposited. Our test of 10 arbitrarily selected deposits received
between January 2022 and August 2023 disclosed that all collections tested
were deposited intact.
14

--- Page 17 ---
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual10 requires
collections to be restrictively endorsed and initially recorded immediately upon
receipt, and adequately secured until deposit. Additionally, the Manual requires
collections be independently verified to deposit.
Similar conditions were noted in our prior audit. In response to that report, VSA
agreed to implement new procedures requiring checks be restrictively endorsed
upon receipt and an independent employee verifying collections were deposited
by June 2020. However, as noted above, these procedures were not implemented.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that VSA
a. restrictively endorse and initially record checks immediately upon receipt
and ensure checks are properly safeguarded until deposit (repeat), and
b. ensure an employee independent of the cash receipt function verifies all
collections from the initial recordation to the related deposit slip (repeat).
10 The updated Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual, effective June 2024, has the same
requirements.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Vital Statistics
Administration (VSA), a unit within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH),
for the period beginning January 16, 2020 and ending January 15, 2024. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine VSA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain payroll functions, contract monitoring and
payments, cash receipts, certificate issuance, monitoring of certificates issued by
the Local Health Departments and Motor Vehicle Administration branches, and
information systems security and control. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to VSA by MDH.
These support services (such as certain payroll, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records, related fiscal functions, and certain aspects of the network
information systems related to VSA’s Maryland Electronic Vital Records
Registration Systems (MD-EVRRS) are included within the scope of our audit of
the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units. Our audit also did not
include other network information systems services related VSA’s MD-EVRRS
system that were provided to VSA by the Department of Human Services (DHS).
These services are included within the scope of our audit of the DHS – Office of
the Secretary and Related Units.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 16, 2020 to January 15, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
16

--- Page 19 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of VSA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from VSA’s vital records systems for the purpose of
selecting test items and assessing user access. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
VSA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to VSA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
17

--- Page 20 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect VSA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to VSA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MDH and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of VSA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH
regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of January 2025 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
 Office of Population Health Improvement
Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration, Office of Population  Office of Preparedness and Response
Health Improvement, Office of  Office of Provider Engagement and
1 08/09/24
Preparedness and Response, and Regulation – Office of Controlled
Office of Provider Engagement and Substances Administration
Regulation
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulation – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
 Kidney Disease Program
2 Pharmacy Services 08/09/24
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance
Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis
and Treatment Program
3 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center
4 State Psychiatric Hospital Centers  Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
 Springfield Hospital Center
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review
5 Health Regulatory Commissions Commission 01/25/24
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
Medical Care Programs Managed Care Program, known as
6 Administration - Managed Care HealthChoice including oversight of the nine 12/14/23
Program private Managed Care Organizations
Medical Care Programs
7 Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/23
Administration
19

--- Page 22 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of January 2025 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director
for Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and Other
8 Disabilities 10/19/23
Units
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
9 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
Developmental Disabilities
10 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Administration
Behavioral Health Administration and
 Behavioral Health Administration
Medical Care Programs
 Medical Care Programs Administration
11 Administration - Administrative 10/25/22
Administrative Service Organization for
Service Organization for Behavioral
Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
12 10/24/22
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institutes for Children and Children and Adolescents
13 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
14 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
 22 Health Professional Boards and
15 Regulatory Services Commissions 01/19/21
 Office of Health Care Quality
20

--- Page 23 ---
APPENDIX
March 18, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of Health –
Vital Statistics Administration for the period beginning January 16, 2020 and ending January 15, 2024.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Ryan B. Moran, DrPH, MHSA, Acting Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
Enclosures
cc: Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Emily Berg, JD, MPH, Deputy Chief of Staff
Nilesh Kalyanaraman, M.D., Deputy Secretary, Public Health Services, MDH
Erin S. Penniston, Chief of Staff, Public Health Services, MDH
Monique E. Wilson, Dr. P.H., Director, VSA
Crystal D. Weaver, Deputy Director and State Registrar, VSA
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Vital Statistics Administration
Agency Response Form
Integrated Electronic Vital Records Registration System
(IEVRRS)
Finding 1
VSA did not adequately monitor the IEVRRS project management vendor to
ensure that the project was completed on budget and on time. As of June 30,
2023, the projected IEVRRS budget costs have increased by $16 million and
the projected completion date has been delayed by four years.
We recommend that VSA
a. monitor the project management vendor including obtaining and
reviewing explanations for significant changes, such as increases in
estimate costs and time to complete the project; and
b. coordinate with MDH and DoIT to track payments made to the project
management vendor to ensure that they do not exceed the related task
orders.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of VSA is ensuring that we obtain documentation and review explanations
corrective action or for any significant changes to the budget. In this regard, VSA has also
explain disagreement. updated our internal project management documentation via an approved
change request to document the increased budget and expanded timeline.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of VSA is tracking payments to the various project vendors and ensures
corrective action or that payments do not exceed the associated task orders. In this regard,
explain disagreement. MDH has begun coordinating regularly with MDThink and will develop
an SOP to document these processes.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Vital Statistics Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
VSA did not obtain support for amounts invoiced and paid to IEVRRS
vendors. In addition, VSA made payments totaling $53,000 that were not in
accordance with the related contract, including overpayments totaling
$28,000.
We recommend VSA
a. obtain documentation, such as payroll records and receipts to support
amounts invoiced;
b. ensure payments, such as labor rates and overhead are in accordance
with the approved contract; and
c. take appropriate action, such as recouping payments that were not in
accordance with the contract terms, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of VSA is now coordinated regularly with MDThink, including ensuring
corrective action or we obtain documentation such as payroll records (where available) and
explain disagreement. receipts to support amounts invoiced.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of VSA is now ensuring that payments (such as labor rates where available,
corrective action or and overhead) are in accordance with the approved contract/task order.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of VSA will perform closer review of past invoices and will take
corrective action or appropriate action on any identified overpayments. VSA will develop an
explain disagreement. SOP to document these processes.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Vital Statistics Administration
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 3 and 4 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDH’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, MDH’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Vital Statistics Administration
Agency Response Form
Birth Records
Finding 5
VSA did not review manual changes to birth records on EBRS.
We recommend that VSA
a. review manual changes to birth records; and
b. establish written procedures for reviewing manual changes, including the
frequency and number of changes to review and the level of
documentation required to support the changes.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of VSA continues to audit at least 25% of manual changes
corrective action or (amendments/corrections) made to the Electronic Birth Registration
explain disagreement. System (EBRS). VSA will increase the audit frequency if the results
show changes are made without the required documentation.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of VSA Management created a standard operating procedure that includes
corrective action or procedures for reviewing manual changes, including frequency and
explain disagreement. number of changes to review and the level of documentation required to
support changes.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Vital Statistics Administration
Agency Response Form
Local Health Departments (LHDs)
Finding 6
VSA did not ensure LHDs remitted fees collected on behalf of VSA for
certified copies of birth and death certificates resulting in the failure to
identify and recover at least $376,000.
We recommend that VSA
a. obtain LHD collection information either from the LHDs or through
utilizing output reports from WOMS to determine amounts not provided
to VSA, including those noted in the analysis above; and
b. collect amounts due from LHDs, including the aforementioned $376,000.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Notices, invoices and transmittals have been sent to the LHDs for all
corrective action or payments to date.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of Notices, invoices and transmittals have been sent to the LHDs for all
corrective action or payments due to date. LHDs have until 3/31/2025 to submit past due
explain disagreement. transmittals. VSA will take additional action, as necessary, if this
deadline is missed.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Vital Statistics Administration
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
VSA had not established adequate procedures and controls over certificate
fee collections received at its headquarters.
We recommend that VSA
a. restrictively endorse and initially record checks immediately upon receipt
and ensure checks are properly safeguarded until deposit (repeat), and
b. ensure an employee independent of the cash receipt function verifies all
collections from the initial recordation to the related deposit slip (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of VSA has restrictively endorsed and initially record checks immediately
corrective action or upon receipt and ensure checks are properly safeguarded until deposit
explain disagreement. VSA has created a standard operating procedure that includes the
guidelines for processing checks, which includes endorsing with a stamp
and checks being locked in a safe immediately upon receipt.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of VSA has ensured an employee independent of the cash receipt function
corrective action or verifies all collections from the initial recordation to the related deposit
explain disagreement. slip. VSA has created a standard operating procedure and back-up for
the check deposit process to ensure the timely deposit of collections.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 30 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Dianne P. Ramirez
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditors
John E. Rooney
Zoe D. Smith
Staff Auditors