Title: Prince George's County Public Schools
Date: 03/25/2025
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67e6debbfc08946efd2dd911
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:18:10.962120
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Prince George’s County Public Schools
March 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 25, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Prince
George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) in accordance with the requirements of
the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. The objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether PGCPS’
procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its
assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use of financial
resources.
Our audit disclosed that PGPCS overpaid one employee $7.4 million without
immediate detection because critical human resources and payroll transactions
were not subject to required controls, a condition identified in our two prior audit
reports but not corrected. PGCPS also did not always perform a newly required
screening for positions involving direct contact with minors. Specifically, PGCPS
had not performed the screening as of October 19, 2023 for 7 of the 10 employees
we tested who had been employed for periods ranging from 190 to 426 days.
Our audit further disclosed that PGCPS’ procurement policies were not
sufficiently comprehensive and were not consistently used when obtaining goods
and services. For example, PGCPS did not always prepare written justifications,
obtain Prince George's County Board of Education approval, or publish contract
awards for sole source procurements on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as
required. PGCPS also improperly used an intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreement to procure a school bus camera system contract resulting in
a lack of assurance that it obtained the best value.
Our audit also disclosed PGCPS did not have sufficient internal controls and
accountability in several areas, including equipment inventory, transportation, and

--- Page 4 ---
health care services and did not apply for certain funding obtained by other State
school systems. For example, PGCPS did not audit or adequately monitor the
performance of its third-party administrators that provide health care claims
processing services.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 9 of the 13 non-
cybersecurity-related findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the
non-cybersecurity-related findings we determined that PGCPS satisfactorily
addressed 3 of those 9 findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this
report.
PGCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of PGCPS’ response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to our
findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
PGCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 10
External Audits 11
Cybersecurity Incident 12
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 12
Findings and Recommendations 15
Revenue and Billing Cycle 15
Federal Funds 16
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 1 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 18
practices were not incorporated into Prince George’s County Public
Schools’ (PGCPS) procurement policies and were not consistently used
when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPAs).
* Finding 2 – PGCPS did not always prepare written justifications, 20
obtain Board approval, or publish contract awards for sole source
procurements on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required.
Finding 3 – PGCPS did not execute formal written contracts and did not 21
obtain approval from the Board for special education services.
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 4 – PGCPS did not analyze, or otherwise limit, the number of 22
time records supervisors were reviewing and approving. We
identified certain supervisors who routinely approved a large number
of time records each pay period.
* Finding 5 – Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not 23
subject to a documented independent supervisory review, resulting in
one employee being overpaid $7.4 million without immediate
detection.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
* Finding 6 – Internal controls and record keeping for bus driver payrolls 24
were not adequate to ensure the propriety of payroll payments.
Finding 7 – PGCPS did not always perform a newly required screening 26
for positions involving direct contact with minors.
Equipment Control and Accountability
* Finding 8 – PGCPS did not complete physical inventories of equipment 27
every three years and resolve missing items from technology equipment
inventories in a timely manner as required.
Information Technology
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 28
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 28
Finding 11 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 28
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 28
Transportation Services
Finding 12 – PGCPS improperly used an ICPA to procure a school bus 31
camera system contract resulting in a lack of assurance that it obtained
the best value.
* Finding 13 – PGCPS did not use its automated bus routing software to 32
periodically perform a system-wide analysis of routes and related bus
capacities to maximize efficiency. In addition, PGCPS had not
established comprehensive bus routing procedures.
Finding 14 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 33
Food Services 33
School Board Oversight 34
Management of Other Risks
Finding 15 – PGCPS did not obtain and review claim data to support 36
amounts invoiced by its third-party administrators (TPA) or audit
healthcare claims activity paid by the TPA to ensure they were proper.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 16 – PGCPS did not apply for available School Resource Officer 37
grant funding through the Maryland Center for School Safety to offset
the cost of school resource officers for fiscal years 2021 through
2024.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 38
Agency Response Appendix
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Prince George’s County Public Schools
(PGCPS) ranks 2nd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2022 full-time student enrollment was 128,777 students.
PGCPS had 198 schools, consisting of 120 elementary, 12 elementary-middle (K-
8), 24 middle schools, 24 high schools, and 18 other types of schools (including 5
early childhood, 4 special needs, and 9 public charter schools).
Funding
PGCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State, Prince
George’s County, and federal government. According to the PGCPS’ audited
financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $2.7 billion
in fiscal year 2022; including $1.4 billion from the State. According to MSDE’s
records, the State funding included formula funding grants totaling $1.1 billion,
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future grants totaling $156 million, and State-share for
employee pension payments totaling $115 million, and other State funding
sources, such as for capital projects, totaling $43 million. See Figure 1 on the
following page for PGCPS’ funding by source for the six-year period from fiscal
year 2017 through fiscal year 2022 and Figure 2 (on page 3) for revenue sources
per enrolled student in fiscal year 2022.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1
PGCPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2017 through 2022
(dollar amounts in millions)
135,962
132,667
132,322
131,657
130,814
128,777
$1,444 $1,435
$1,227 $1,242 $1,288 $1,350
$912 $926
$793 $821 $833 $851
$351
$180 $184 $191 $172 $174
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Enrollment State Local Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2022 included:
 $1,099 million for Foundation Formula Grants
 $156 million for Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Grants
 $115 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
 $43 million for Capital Projects
Source: PGCPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
PGCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2022
Other
$154
1%
Federal
$2,564
12% Local
$7,193
34%
State
$11,147
53%
Source: PGCPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides additional
funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as Prekindergarten Aid).
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Expenditures
According to PGCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2022 expenditures
were approximately $2.7 billion. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 75 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2022. According to MSDE records, during
the 2021-2022 school year, PGCPS had 18,232 full-time equivalent positions,
which consisted of 11,928 instructional and 6,304 non-instructional
positions. Instruction accounted for 57 percent of PGCPS’ expenditures on a
categorical basis (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
PGCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2022
(amounts in millions)
$1,532.5
Instruction
57%
$346.0
Facilities & Capital Projects
13%
$343.7
Administration & Support
Enrollment
13%
128,777
$294.1
Special Education
11%
$91.0
Employees
Transportation
3% 18,232
$75.8
Food Service
3% Cost Per Pupil
$20,836
Source: PGCPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
9

--- Page 12 ---
Oversight
PGCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of 10 members (currently
8 elected members, 1 member appointed by the Prince George’s County
government, and 1 non-voting student member).2 MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of PGCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various
financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain
provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with PGCPS
to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Prince
George’s County government also exercises authority over PGCPS primarily
through the review and approval of PGCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a 7-member Board
appointed by the Governor, with advice and consent of the Senate. The Board
Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker of the
House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, MSDE, and the Interagency Commission on School
Construction. Specifically, the law provides that the OIGE may receive and
investigate information and complaints concerning potential fraud, waste, and
abuse of public funds and property; civil rights violations involving students or
employees; whether policies and procedures governing the prevention and
reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with applicable federal and State
laws; and compliance with other applicable federal and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
2 According to Chapter 217, Laws of Maryland, 2022, effective July 1, 2022, the PGCPS Board
membership was reduced from 14 members to 10 members after the terms of the current
appointed members expire. Once the terms expire, there will be nine elected voting members
and one non-voting student member.
10

--- Page 13 ---
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
review the OIGE issued three public reports related to PGCPS reviews and
investigations. We considered the reports during our current audit.
External Audits
As required by State law, PGCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of PGCPS as of June 30, 2017,
2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023, and the respective changes in its
financial position and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
PGCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of PGCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independent audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
PGCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide
assurance to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place,
and the entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2017 through 2023 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2022 financial statement audit and the work papers for the fiscal
year 2021 Single Audit, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the
following areas:
11

--- Page 14 ---
 State and local government revenues received via electronic funds transfer
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
Cybersecurity Incident
In August 2023, PGCPS experienced a cybersecurity incident resulting in a data
breach and ransomware3 attack that affected a large part of the PGCPS computer
network and disrupted Information Technology (IT) operations for many servers
and end users. PGCPS notified the Maryland State Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) and informed or engaged various other parties for recovery
efforts. A forensics analysis concluded that sensitive information had been
compromised and affected individuals were notified and offered credit
monitoring. PGCPS did not pay the ransom but, as of January 28, 2025, the cost
of the recovery efforts totaled approximately $1 million for legal, IT forensics,
and credit monitoring services. PGCPS advised its cybersecurity insurance
provider of the incident, but the incident-related expenses fell below the insurance
policy deductible. The incident did not significantly impact our audit and we
were able to obtain information needed to satisfy our audit objectives and related
conclusions.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 9 of the 13 non-
cybersecurity-related findings contained in our preceding audit report dated
March 11, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 4 on the following pages, for the non-
cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that PGCPS satisfactorily
addressed 3 of those 9 findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this
report.
3 As defined by the Federal Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Existing procedures and controls were not adequate to ensure that
Not repeated
Finding 1 proper amounts were received and all collections were deposited for the
(Not followed up on)
Before and After School Care Extended Learning Program.
PGCPS did not maintain required documentation justifying the use of
sole source procurements or the benefits of using intergovernmental Repeated
Finding 2 cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPAs) as required by State Law (Current Finding 1
and did not ensure that ICPA-related invoice pricing agreed to the and 2)
ICPA.
PGCPS did not always obtain Board approval for contracts and did not
always document its reasons for awarding competitively bid contracts to Repeated
Finding 3
vendors that were not deemed the most qualified or the lowest cost (Current Finding 2)
bidders.
PGCPS did not establish adequate internal controls over its automated
human resource and payroll system, as user capabilities were not
Finding 4 Status Redacted4
properly limited, and supervisors were tasked with routinely approving
an excessive number of time records.
Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not always Repeated
Finding 5
subject to a documented independent supervisory review. (Current Finding 5)
Internal controls and record keeping related to Transportation
Repeated
Finding 6 Department bus driver and bus attendant payrolls were not adequate to
(Current Finding 6)
ensure the propriety of salary payments.
PGCPS lacked a policy requiring the justification or rationale for
Finding 7 executive employee salary increases and such increases were not Not repeated
reported to the Board.
Physical inventories of equipment were not conducted as required and Repeated
Finding 8
access to the automated inventory records was not adequately restricted. (Current Finding 8)
PGCPS equipment inventory records were not comprehensive or Not repeated
Finding 9
complete. (Not followed up on)
The ERP and student management system databases were not
configured to log certain critical security activity, nor were the ERP’s Status Redacted4
Finding 10
account and password controls adequate. In addition, an insecure
service was enabled for the student management system database.
Thirty-five publicly accessible servers were improperly located within
the internal network, intrusion detection prevention system coverage for
Finding 11 untrusted traffic did not exist, and PGCPS network resources were not Status Redacted4
secured against improper access from contractors using remote access
and high school students using school computer labs and media centers.
4 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i)
of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
PGCPS had not established procedures to ensure malware protection
software was installed, current, and operational on all active computers,
Finding 12
and that computers running vulnerable installed software had security Status Redacted5
updates applied.
PGCPS did not ensure that employee access to its automated financial
Finding 13 Status Redacted5
systems was appropriate.
PGCPS did not follow best practices for selecting pre-approved vendors
Finding 14 for task orders and the selection process was not consistent between the Not repeated
construction and mechanical Job Order Costing (JOC) contracts.
PGCPS did not adequately review price quotes submitted by JOC
Finding 15 vendors selected for task orders. Consequently, approved task orders Not repeated
contained questionable or unsupported costs.
PGCPS did not verify that guaranteed savings were achieved related to Not repeated
Finding 16
work performed under two energy performance contracts. (Not followed up on)
The performance of preventive maintenance was not consistently Not repeated
Finding 17
documented and tracked for monitoring purposes. (Not followed up on)
PGCPS did not establish adequate accountability over access to the
Finding 18 Status Redacted5
automated fuel dispensing system.
PGCPS did not implement certain practices to promote more efficient Repeated
Finding 19
use of its bus fleet. (Current Finding 13)
5 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i)
of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Prince George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) revenues consist primarily of
funds received from the State, Prince George’s County, and the federal
government. According to PGCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from
all sources totaled approximately $2.7 billion in fiscal year 2022, including
approximately $1.4 billion from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited PGCPS’ financial statements and the
objectives of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this
work to provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received
via electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s
procedural review (related to the fiscal year 2022 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2022, school
activity collections totaled $7.7 million and the June 30, 2022 fund balance was
$16.6 million. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of this
activity, we did not review the procedures and controls over school activity funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area, including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Federal Funds
Background
PGCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to PGCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2022 (latest available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled $331.7
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid
reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $152 million in fiscal year 2019 to $330.2 million in
fiscal year 2022 (117 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
Specifically, according to PGCPS’ records, as of June 30, 2022, PGCPS was
awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $524.1 million to be
distributed over federal fiscal years 2020 through 2024 under the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief
Supplemental Appropriations Act, and the American Rescue Plan.6
As of June 30, 2023, reported PGCPS expenditures from March 2020 to June
2023 related to these COVID-19 grants totaled $338.1 million, and were primarily
comprised of staffing, laptops, instructional software and materials, personal
protection equipment, and sanitary supplies. We were advised that PGCPS
requested extensions for distributing any funds not used by the end of the grant
period (which was generally by the end of federal fiscal year 2024). Approval of
the extension shifts the spending deadline from January 2025 to March 2026.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audit of PGCPS’ federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on
PGCPS compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and
audited the required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes
claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2017 through 2022. Our
review of the Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in
this report.
6 In addition to the federal grants, PGCPS was also awarded one State COVID-19 grant totaling
$517,500, which was spent during fiscal year 2021. State grants are subject to review and testing
during our audit.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
PGCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to PGCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued two reports in April and May 2022 of the results of its review of a
total of 100 student case files for 73 criteria. The report did not specifically
address the propriety of Medicaid billing, but overall concluded that PGCPS was
generally compliant with most criteria. For example, PGCPS was 100 percent
compliant with 52 criteria and between 94 and 99 percent compliant with 18
criteria.
According to PGCPS records, fiscal year 2022 state and federal reimbursements
for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $3 million, which was 48
percent lower than the previous fiscal year. Based on our current assessment of
significance and risk relative to our audit objectives, our audit did not include a
review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in the federal fund area, including policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and PGCPS’ records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $675 million during fiscal year 2022. PGCPS uses a
financial management system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are
created in the system by departments and are subject to on-line departmental and
purchasing department approvals. Purchase orders are prepared in the system by
the purchasing department based on approved requisitions. The purchasing
department also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable department for
entry into the financial management system. The system matches invoices to
appropriate purchasing documents and the verification of receipt entered by the
17

--- Page 20 ---
receiving school or department. The system then prints vendor checks or
processes an electronic payment and posts the payment to the financial records.
PGCPS’ written procurement policies generally require that procurements
exceeding $50,000 be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the
Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Contracts and agreements
are to be approved by the Prince George’s County Board of Education (the Board)
based on the following thresholds: (1) professional services that exceed $250,000,
(2) instructional or staff development services that exceed $500,000, and (3)
instructional materials and supplies that exceed $1 million. All other types of
contracts that PGCPS procures equal to or exceeding $50,000 are to be approved
by the Board.
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into PGCPS’ procurement policies and were not consistently
used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPA).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into PGCPS’ procurement policies and were not consistently used by
PGCPS when participating in an ICPA. State law, which legal counsel to the
Maryland General Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies,
allows the use of ICPAs only after the using entity has met the statutory
requirement of determining (or assessing) in writing that the use of such
arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or
promote intergovernmental cooperation.7
According to its records, PGCPS used the ICPA procurement method for 626
procurements with awards totaling $565 million during the period from July 1,
2019 through May 31, 2023. Our review of PGCPS’ procurement policies and
7 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5- 112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
18

--- Page 21 ---
purchasing manual disclosed that the above statutory requirement as well as the
following critical best practices were not included.
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
 Research, compare and evaluate available ICPAs;
 Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
 Obtain a copy of ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification
In addition, we tested PGCPS’ participation in nine ICPAs (selected primarily
based on significance), awarded during fiscal years 2019 through 2023. Six of
these ICPAs had an award amount totaling approximately $32.5 million and three
ICPAs did not have a contract value since they were contracts to purchase
equipment at discounted prices with indefinite quantities. According to PGCPS
records, payments on these nine contracts totaled approximately $20.3 million
during fiscal year 2023.
Our review disclosed that PGCPS did not include certain of the aforementioned
best practices in the ICPAs tested. For example, PGCPS did not analyze the costs
of conducting competitive solicitations or research, compare, and evaluate other
available ICPAs for any of the ICPAs tested. We further noted that PGCPS had
not prepared the statutorily required written assessments for any of the contracts
tested to justify the use of the ICPA. Incorporating ICPA best practices into
PGCPS procurement policies could help ensure they are consistently used.
A similar condition regarding written assessments not being prepared to document
the benefit of using ICPAs was included in our preceding audit report. In its
response to our preceding report, PGCPS stated it would require that written
assessments of the benefits of using an ICPA be included in each ICPA
procurement file. However, PGCPS did not take the corrective actions as
indicated.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
The practices also require that ICPA users ensure that the contract was awarded
through a competitive procurement process, require addendums to be executed
documenting their participation, and incorporate local required terms and
conditions.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PGCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs (repeat).
Finding 2
PGCPS did not always prepare written justifications, obtain Board approval,
or publish contract awards for sole source procurements on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required.
Analysis
PGCPS did not always prepare written justifications, obtain Board approval, or
publish contract awards for sole source procurements on eMMA8 as required.
According to PGCPS records, it used the sole source procurement method for 754
procurements with awards totaling $116 million during the period from July 1,
2019 through May 31, 2023.
We tested four sole source procurements contracts (based on materiality) in fiscal
year 2023 that were paid $9.5 million for education services (each exceeded the
threshold for Board approval). Our test disclosed that written justifications were
not prepared as required for two of these contracts with payments totaling $3.2
million in fiscal year 2023. In addition, none of the contracts had been submitted
to the Board for approval or had awards published on eMMA as required.
PGCPS’ Procurement Policy requires that contracts equal to or exceeding
$50,0009 awarded on a basis other than lowest evaluated bid or highest technical
lowest price (such as sole source) should be sent to the Board for review and
approval and have written justifications for sole source contracts. State law
requires the solicitation and award of contracts procured by public schools after
July 1, 2022 to be published on eMMA. Publishing awards on eMMA provides
transparency over procurements including information about the winning bidder
and the amount of the related award.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of written justifications and Board approvals
of sole source awards were noted in our preceding audit report. In response to
8 eMMA is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
9 This amount was for the general procurements, however this amount does not apply for certain
special categories, for example special education services noted in finding 3.
20

--- Page 23 ---
that report, PGCPS stated it would replace its letter of justification with a sole
source justification request form and revise its policies to align with its
procurement practices (including obtaining Board approval). Although PGCPS
implemented these changes, as noted above, the sole source justification request
form was not always prepared, and contracts were not always approved by the
Board.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that PGCPS
a. ensure that sole source contract justifications are prepared as required
(repeat),
b. obtain Board approval for contracts as required (repeat), and
c. publish sole source contract awards on eMMA as required.
Finding 3
PGCPS did not execute formal written contracts and did not obtain approval
from the Board for special education services.
Analysis
PGCPS did not execute formal written contracts or obtain approval from the
Board for certain special education services. PGCPS provides special education
services in accordance with the individualized education program (IEP)
developed for each student. According to PGCPS’ records, it paid two Maryland
State Department of Education (MSDE) certified non-public schools a total of
$61.6 million for special education services during fiscal years 2020 through
2023.
Our review disclosed that PGCPS did not have a contract with the two MSDE
certified non-public schools. Additionally, PGCPS did not obtain Board approval
for the services from these entities as required by its Procurement Policy for
contracts (including special education services) over $500,000. Although not
specifically required by its Policy, written contracts set forth all financial terms
and conditions, define the duties and responsibilities of the parties, and protect
each party in the event of default, and provide other critical terms for items such
as resolution of disputes, termination for convenience, and retention of records.
PGCPS management advised us that it did not follow the Policy because MSDE
certified the special education services and approved the rates of services
provided by non-public schools. However, there was no exemption for these
services in PGCPS’ Policy and regardless, PGCPS did not have the safeguards
and controls provided by a contract and Board approval.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that PGCPS
a. modify its Procurement Policy to require formal written contracts for
special education services, and
b. comply with its Policy by obtaining Board approval for special education
services.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the PGCPS
budget. According to PGCPS’ records, fiscal year 2022 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled approximately $2 billion, representing 75 percent of its total
expenditures. According to MSDE reports, during the 2021-2022 school year,
PGCPS had 18,232 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 11,928
instructional and 6,304 non-instructional positions.
PGCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
Finding 4
PGCPS did not analyze, or otherwise limit, the number of time records
supervisors were reviewing and approving. We identified certain supervisors
who routinely approved a large number of time records each pay period.
Analysis
PGCPS did not analyze, or otherwise limit, the number of time records
supervisors were reviewing and approving. Our analysis of the 483 supervisors
with timecard approval responsibility as of July 17, 2022 disclosed that 11 were
approving between 200 to 271 timecards, 30 were approving between 100 to 200
timecards, and 96 were approving between 50 to 99 timecards each pay period.
The average number of timecards approved by a supervisor was 38.
PGCPS’ Administrative Procedure for Timekeeping and Leave Reporting states
anyone who is approving timecards should be certifying the timecard agrees to
source documentation and the supporting documentation should be signed by the
approver. Consequently, given the large number of timecards to approve, we
22

--- Page 25 ---
question the effectiveness of certain of these supervisory reviews to ensure the
timecards were accurate and supported.
A similar condition regarding excessive supervisory timecard approval
responsibility was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports. PGCPS
stated in its response to our preceding report that it would consider changing the
approver assignments in it automated payroll system to address inequities in the
workload of the supervisors. However, as noted above the workload inequities
still existed at the time of our review.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that PGCPS analyze its current supervisory responsibilities
for approving timecards and agreeing them to supporting documentation,
and to the extent practical, reduce the number of timecards these individuals
are responsible for approving (repeat).
Finding 5
Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not subject to a
documented independent supervisory review, resulting in one employee
being overpaid $7.4 million without detection.
Analysis
Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not subject to a
documented independent supervisory review, resulting in one employee being
overpaid $7.4 million without immediate detection. During fiscal year 2022,
PGCPS processed manual payroll adjustments totaling approximately $27 million
and salary adjustments totaling $62 million.
Our review disclosed that PGCPS did not require supervisory review and
approval of manual payroll adjustments (such as payments of accumulated leave
or one-time adjustments for additional pay). Our test of 14 one-time payment
adjustments (selected based on materiality) to 10 employees for accumulated
leave and other pay adjustments totaling approximately $10.2 million, disclosed
that two payments totaling $7.5 million were not approved and lacked adequate
supporting documentation resulting in overpayments. For example, a manual pay
adjustment on June 3, 2022 resulted in a substitute teacher who should have been
paid $306 being paid $7.4 million. The overpayment resulted from a payroll
employee erroneously entering the employee’s identification number as the
number of workdays resulting in the teacher being paid for approximately 73,000
workdays rather than the 3 workdays documented on the employee’s time records.
23

--- Page 26 ---
We were advised that PGCPS did not become aware of the overpayment until
July 25, 2022 when a Budget Office review identified an increase in substitute
teacher expenditures. This prompted an investigation and the overpayment being
recovered on July 28, 2022 (approximately 2 months after the payment). PGCPS
advised us that it subsequently modified its automated system to restrict the count
of workdays that could be entered and created an output report of payroll
payments that exceeded a pre-determined range for supervisory review.
Similar conditions regarding the human resource and payroll supervisory reviews
were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports. PGCPS stated in
response to our preceding audit report that PGCPS would enact a method to
document supervisory approvals for changes to personnel information and salary
adjustments, and an independent validation would be implemented to ensure the
accuracy of leave payouts and one-time employee payments. However, as noted
above the review and approvals were still not always documented.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that PGCPS
a. perform and document independent supervisory reviews and approvals
of critical human resource and payroll transactions, including manual
payroll adjustments, salary adjustments and related output reports, to
ensure that the transactions are supported by appropriate documentation
(repeat); and
b. review previously processed pay adjustments for propriety and take
corrective action for any overpayments.
Finding 6
Internal controls and record keeping for bus driver payrolls were not
adequate to ensure the propriety of payroll payments.
Analysis
Internal controls and record keeping for bus driver payrolls were not adequate to
ensure the propriety of payroll payments. Bus drivers were paid based on
predetermined route hours as calculated by an automated routing system, with
manual adjustments for leave taken and overtime worked. According to PGCPS
Transportation Department’s records, payroll expenditures totaled approximately
$66 million, including $12 million for overtime, during fiscal year 2022. The
Transportation Department employs 1,485 personnel, including 1,181 bus drivers.
24

--- Page 27 ---
 PGCPS did not have a standardized process (for example, timesheets or time
clocks) to document the actual time worked by drivers and attendants.
Instead, supervisors stationed at the various bus lots maintained varying
documentation to track leave, substitute assignments, and other duties
affecting time, which were to be posted to the Department’s timekeeping
system for eventual interface to the automated payroll system.
 Overtime hours were not always adequately supported and properly approved.
Our arbitrary test of 1,234 overtime hours for 10 Transportation Department
employees with related payments totaling $59,000 during pay periods ending
from April 2021 to February 2023, disclosed that overtime was not supported
with an approved time sheet or lacked documentation that the overtime hours
were actually worked. For example, 758 hours of overtime with payments
totaling approximately $53,370 for 9 employees lacked documented
supervisory approval to support that the overtime hours were actually worked.
Similar conditions regarding payroll documentation were commented upon in our
three preceding audit reports dating back to January 2006. In its response to our
preceding audit report, PGCPS noted that corrective actions would include
standardization of payroll reporting and monitoring forms, and creating and
utilizing a process whereby all extra work is appropriately documented, verified
and approved. However, our current audit disclosed that these corrective actions
had not been implemented.
Recommendation 6
We recommend PGCPS ensure
a. that a standard time reporting process for documenting transportation
employees’ time worked (such as timesheets or time clock) is
implemented and that related supporting documents or records are
retained (repeat), and
b. all overtime is properly supported and approved in accordance with
PGCPS procedures (repeat).
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 7
PGCPS did not always perform a newly required screening for positions
involving direct contact with minors.
Analysis
PGCPS did not always perform a newly required screening for positions
involving direct contact with minors (such as, care, supervision, guidance, or
control of, or routine interaction). State law effective July 1, 2019 (and updated
July 1, 2021) requires local education agencies to provide screening of certain
applicants. Specifically, the schools must obtain information from an applicant
for positions that involve direct contact with a minor including a written statement
whether they were the subject of a child sexual abuse or sexual misconduct
investigation by any employer that resulted in a finding.10 The law also required
local education agencies to contact the applicant’s current or prior employers and
obtain the same information.
According to PGCPS’ records, during fiscal year 2022, PGCPS hired 744
individuals11 that were assigned to schools or student programs that would have
contact with minors. We arbitrarily tested 10 employees hired after the
aforementioned law went into effect. Our test disclosed that PGCPS had not
performed the screening for 7 of these employees who had been employed for
periods ranging from 190 to 426 days as of October 19, 202312. Without a proper
screening, PGCPS lacks assurance regarding the conduct of the individuals it
hired.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that PGCPS comply with State law and perform and
document the required screening for positions involving direct contact with
minors, including those noted above.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to PGCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, vehicles, and equipment) totaled
$260 million as of June 30, 2022. PGCPS maintains centralized automated
10 This is in addition to existing requirements to obtain a criminal background check.
11 PGCPS was not required to perform screening procedures for individuals who did not have
former employment involving contact with children.
12 Based on our inquiry, between October 20, 2023 and November 1, 2023 PGCPS completed the
screening for 2 of the aforementioned employees.
26

--- Page 29 ---
records for all equipment with a cost of $5,000 or more for financial statement
purposes. In addition, PGCPS’ Office of Technology Services maintains an
inventory database of laptop computers and other mobile equipment (such as
tablets and video cameras), regardless of cost, assigned to schools, students, and
employees. PGCPS has established comprehensive written equipment policies.
Finding 8
PGCPS did not complete physical inventories of equipment every three years
and resolve missing items from technology equipment inventories in a timely
manner as required.
Analysis
PGCPS did not complete physical inventories of equipment every three years and
resolve missing items from technology equipment inventories in a timely manner
as required. As of October 31, 2023, the last complete physical inventory of
equipment was completed in fiscal year 2019. We were advised by PGCPS
management that the physical inventory scheduled for fiscal year 2022 was not
performed due to staff having other priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic. In
addition, although PGCPS conducted a partial inventory of information
technology equipment at 43 schools in July 2023, it had not investigated and
resolved 9,376 missing items valued at approximately $6.3 million identified
during the inventory.
PGCPS’ Assets Operating Manual requires that capital assets valued at $1,500 or
more are to be inventoried every three years. The Manual also requires that the
inventory assessment include a reconciliation between the inventory physical
count and the property records in a timely manner.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of physical inventories was commented
upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to February 2014. In its
response to our preceding audit report, PGCPS noted that it would complete
inventories every three years and that it would complete a physical inventory of
all equipment in June 2019. Although this inventory was completed in 2019, the
next physical inventory was not conducted until July 2023 as noted above.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that PGCPS
a. conduct physical inventories of equipment every three years in
accordance with its Assets Operating Manual (repeat); and
b. investigate and resolve missing equipment items identified during
physical inventories, including those items noted above.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 9
through 11 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with PGCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation and Maintenance
Background
PGCPS employs a staff of 1,759 employees to maintain its 198 schools (including
charter, special education, and alternative) and a number of other facilities (such
as administrative and support offices). According to PGCPS’ fiscal year 2024
Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and
systemic improvements to PGCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated
to cost $1.2 billion.
PGCPS Capital Projects Were Competitively Solicited and Approved by the
Board
Our review of four construction-related procurements awarded during fiscal years
2021 through 2023 totaling $371 million, disclosed that all four contracts were
competitively solicited and approved by the Board.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
PGCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and
minimize energy costs. For example, PGCPS provides scheduled and preventive
maintenance of its buildings and equipment and monitors its equipment to prevent
emergency repairs. In addition, to minimize energy costs, PGCPS utilizes an
energy management system that monitors and accounts for energy usage. PGCPS
has written policies that provide for the development of a sustainability plan that
will encourage both students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy
use and conduct internal on-site reviews of building energy efficiency. Finally,
PGCPS has initiatives in place involving limited use of solar (3 schools) and
geothermal (10 schools) alternative energy sources.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of PGCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for facilities
construction, renovation, and maintenance. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by MSDE, PGCPS has approximately 83,650
students eligible to receive student transportation services. These students were
transported using 1,028 system-owned buses. PGCPS reported that 15.6 million
route miles were traveled to transport students for the 2021-2022 school year.
According to PGCPS’ financial records, fiscal year 2022 transportation costs
totaled $91.0 million.
Consultant Recommendations for Student Transportation
Due to its concerns about bus driver shortages, in September 2023, PGCPS hired
a transportation consultant to analyze the efficiency of its use of school buses. In
January 2024, the consultant issued a report with 12 findings and
recommendations to change student transportation, which included aligning
school-by-school bell [start and stop] times, establishing revised bus routes,
diversifying the mix of transportation vehicle types and use of vendors, improving
performance and accountability through the use of technology, and improving
customer service. The target for implementation was in two phases for the 2025
and 2026 school years. The report was presented to the Board in February 2024
and a motion was adopted to develop a plan to implement the recommendations.
29

--- Page 32 ---
School Bus Safety Camera Program
As allowed by State and County law, PGCPS contracted for the use of school bus
safety cameras to monitor drivers who illegally pass a stopped school bus. In
March 2020, PGCPS’ Chief Executive Officer signed a five-year contract (with a
five-year renewal option) with a vendor to install and operate cameras on PGCPS’
system-owned school buses that would be owned and maintained by the vendor.
The contract also provided for cameras to monitor the conduct of drivers and
students inside the bus along with global positioning satellite units to track the
buses. PGCPS was also provided with routing equipment and software to develop
and revise bus routes. The contract was awarded to a vendor that had a similar
agreement with a school system in another state that was competitively procured
by that school system.
PGCPS entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Prince
George’s County Revenue Authority (PGCRA) to process citations and receive a
portion of PGCPS’ share of program revenue. PGCRA functions as a law
enforcement agency for the purpose of implementing this program, as well as the
County’s other traffic camera citation programs.
The vendor installed the cameras on PGCPS buses in March 2021 and the
program began on April 8, 2021. As of the date of the contract, vehicles caught
on camera illegally passing a bus are assessed a $250 fine. The cameras take
videos and still images of vehicles (and license plate) passing a bus that is
operating its alternating flashing red lights. The registered owner(s) of the
vehicles are identified by vendor employees using access provided to Maryland
Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) and other databases. PGCRA verifies if
the image of the event constitutes a violation and a subcontractor prints and mails
the citation to the registered owner. Citations can be paid to the vendor by credit
card, electronically through the internet, or by mailing a check. The vendor is
required to develop automated processes to retrieve and post all daily payment
data.
The contract provides that monthly citation revenue would be disbursed 60
percent to the vendor and 40 percent to the PGCPS once revenue exceeded a
monthly technology fee of $400 per bus from gross monthly citation revenue.
According to the MOU, PGCRA for its citation processing, is to receive a 12.5
percent share of the net revenue, out of PGCPS 40 percent share of the remaining
net proceeds.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Finding 12
PGCPS improperly used an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement (ICPA) to procure a school bus camera system contract resulting
in a lack of assurance that it obtained the best value.
Analysis
PGCPS improperly used an ICPA to procure a school bus camera system contract
resulting in a lack of assurance that it obtained the best value. Although there was
no formal documented analysis, PGCPS advised it obtained and reviewed
applicable information obtained from the out-of-state school system contract, and
determined the vendor met its needs and awarded a contract to this vendor using
an ICPA.
Our review disclosed several issues with the procurement. For example, PGCPS
did not prepare a written assessment of the benefits for using the ICPA as required
by State law and did not document its research of other available ICPAs. In
addition, the PGCPS contract with the vendor did not use any of the key terms
and conditions of the existing ICPA and PGCPS could not support how it
determined certain payment terms, which were different from the ICPA.
Specifically, PGCPS’ contract provided that the monthly citation revenue would
be disbursed 60 percent to the vendor and 40 percent to the County after
deduction of monthly technology fees of $400 per bus from gross citation
revenue. However, the ICPA had a 50 percent split in citation revenue and did
not have a technology fee. PGCPS did not have support for how the technology
fee was determined by the vendor or why it was necessary in addition to the
revenue sharing.
As a result, PGCPS essentially procured its own unique contract with the vendor
without a competitive procurement process and assurance that it obtained the best
value. Our audits of other Maryland local education agencies (LEAs) have
disclosed that other vendors exist for these services and at least one LEA has
awarded a similar contract using a competitive bidding process.
In addition, other LEAs have conducted procurements that have included
negotiations of the financial terms (such as revenue sharing and other fees).
Specifically, while the revenue sharing percentage was consistent with other
LEAs, the $400 monthly technology fee was higher than the fees paid by other
LEAs we know used this vendor’s camera system, which ranged from $85 to
$350. As of February 1, 2024, the County has only received $5.2 million (or 17
percent) of the $30 million in citation revenue for the first 27 months of the
program’s operation from April 8, 2021 through December 31, 2023.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Recommendation 12
We recommend that, in the future, PGCPS
a. competitively procure transportation contracts or comply with State law
when using ICPAs, and
b. ensure the basis and reasoning for revenue sharing and technology fees
are documented in future school bus safety camera contracts.
Finding 13
PGCPS did not use its automated bus routing software to periodically
perform a system-wide analysis of routes and related bus capacities to
maximize efficiency. In addition, PGCPS had not established comprehensive
bus routing procedures.
Analysis
PGCPS did not use its automated bus routing software to perform a system-wide
analysis of bus routes and related bus capacities to maximize the efficiency of its
bus routes and address bus routes with low ridership. In addition, PGCPS had not
established comprehensive bus routing procedures that specified target bus
capacities, ridership goals, and student ride-time limits providing PGCPS with
parameters to design more efficient bus routes.
Although PGCPS uses an automated bus routing software tool to accommodate
students’ school assignments and to address road construction and other issues, it
did not fully use this tool. Specifically, PGCPS did not use this tool to perform a
periodic system-wide analysis to identify alternative routes, route consolidations,
or bus stop consolidations that might reduce costs.
Conducting a system-wide analysis could result in reducing the number of buses
and bus drivers needed to transport students. Our review of the routing system
data for 3,805 regular bus routes on 612 buses for the 2022-2023 school year,
disclosed that 1,137 routes (30 percent) were designed to transport students at less
than 75 percent of customary capacity goals,13 including 343 routes (9 percent)
that were designed to transport students at less than 50 percent of the bus capacity
based on bus size.
A similar condition has been commented upon in our preceding two audit reports
dating back to February 2014. In its response to our preceding audit report
PGCPS stated that it would establish standard operating procedures and fully
13 It is customary for school systems to use bus capacities that are lower than the manufacturer
stated capacities. For example, the customary capacities we used for our calculation were 47
students for a 64-passenger manufacturer stated capacity bus.
32

--- Page 35 ---
implement a scheduling/routing system to improve efficiency by June 2019.
However, no written routing procedures were implemented and while a new
routing system is being used it is still not used to perform a system-wide analysis
of bus routes.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that PGCPS take steps to use its buses more efficiently.
Specifically, we recommend that PGCPS
a. use automated bus routing software to periodically perform a system-
wide analysis of bus routes to maximize the ridership on its bus routes
(repeat); and
b. establish comprehensive bus routing procedures that specify target bus
capacities, ridership goals, and student ride-time limits (repeat).
We determined that Finding 14 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with PGCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 14
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Food Services
Background
According to PGCPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $75.8 million in fiscal year 2022 and were primarily funded
with federal funds totaling $99.2 million. The federal funds are received from the
United States Department of Agriculture based on an established rate per meals
served. PGCPS is allowed to retain federal funds it receives in excess of its
annual food service operating costs to be used to offset future food service
operating costs. According to PGCPS’ audited financial statements, the balance
in PGCPS’ food services fund totaled $42.1 million as of June 30, 2022.
According to MSDE records, in fiscal year 2022, PGCPS had 791 food services
positions for its 198 schools, consisting of 776 cafeteria positions and 15
administrative positions.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Similar to other Maryland local education agencies, PGCPS continued to serve
meals from certain schools during the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis by
providing free meals for parents and students to pick up. The number of meals
increased by 26.1 percent from 17.6 million in fiscal year 2020 to 22.2 million in
fiscal year 2022. PGCPS advised us that the number of meals increased because
students were allowed back to school in-person after the COVID-19 pandemic
and that no employees were laid off due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to Food Services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
As of December 2024, the Prince George’s County Board of Education (the
Board) is composed of 10 members (eight elected members, one member
appointed by the Prince George’s County government, and one non-voting
student member). Chapter 217, Laws of Maryland, 2022, effective July 1, 2022,
reduced the Board from 14 members to 10 members so there will be nine elected
voting members and one non-voting student member. Prior to July 1, 2022, the
Board had nine elected members, four appointed members, and one non-voting
student representative. This change was one of a number of recommendations
made by a task force formed in November 2021 by County executive order to
address certain issues with the Board.
The Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm to conduct
independent audits of the PGCPS financial statements and federal programs. In
addition, the Board established several committees, such as the Parent and
Community Advisory Council and an Ethics Panel, to assist in its oversight of
PGCPS operation and governance,
PGCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that is applicable to both Board
members and PGCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of interest
and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees. Specifically,
annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by Board members,
candidates for the Board, the Superintendent and other administrators (such as
supervisors, school principals, and agency buyers) by April 30th of each year.
34

--- Page 37 ---
In accordance with the policy, PGCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Chair of the Board to interpret ethics policies and
provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on
any reported complaints of ethics violations.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
PGCPS is self-insured for certain medical plans and also has health maintenance
organization (HMO) medical plans in which it pays insurance premiums to cover
incurred claims. PGCPS contracts with four third-party administrator firms
(TPAs) for health care claims processing services14 for employee medical,
prescription, dental and vision.
Figure 5
PGCPS also contracts with a
consultant to help manage PGCPS 2023 Healthcare Financing
the health plans. The (amounts in millions)
consultant performs data Revenues
analysis of health services Employer Contributions $268.5
utilization and costs, Employee Contributions 48.8
provides recommendations Retire Contribution 15.4
on potential rate changes, Rebates 46.2
and evaluates the merits of Other Revenue 3.7
health plan proposals.
Total Revenue $382.6
The health benefit plans, Expenditures
except for one HMO plan,15 Claims Payments $337.1
are financed through an Administrative Fees 8.7
internal service fund (ISF) Life Insurance Premiums 9.6
and provides plan coverage
Other Expenditures 1.8
under contracts with several
Total Expenditures $357.2
insurance companies and
health maintenance
Source: PGCPS Records
organizations. According to
14 PGCPS has one TPA each for the claims for the preferred provider, point of service medical and
vision plans and separate TPAs for the claims of the health management organizations medical,
prescriptions, and dental.
15 Premiums for this HMO TPA totaled $17.6 million in fiscal year 2023.
35

--- Page 38 ---
PGCPS records, the ISF healthcare revenues and expenditures for fiscal year 2023
totaled $382.6 million and $357.2 million respectively (see Figure 5 on page 35).
According to PGCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2023, the
internal service fund balance was $116.3 million. As of September 30, 2023,
PGCPS provided health insurance benefits to approximately 38,300 enrolled
employees, dependents and retirees.
Finding 15
PGCPS did not obtain and review claim data to support amounts invoiced by
its third-party administrators (TPA) or audit healthcare claims activity paid
by the TPA to ensure they were proper.
Analysis
PGCPS did not obtain and review claim data to support amounts invoiced by its
TPA or audit healthcare claims activity paid by the TPA to ensure they were
proper.
 PGCPS did not obtain and review claim data to support the amounts billed by
the TPA for healthcare claims. Specifically, PGCPS approved the amounts
invoiced based on a high-level summary schedule of total claims paid for each
health plan. It did not request or obtain a list of claims paid by enrolled
employees and dependents to ensure it was only billed for eligible plan
participants.
 PGCPS did not obtain audits of healthcare claims paid by the TPAs to ensure
that the billed services were actually provided to participants, were covered by
the health plans, that amounts paid were proper, and that self-reported
performance measures were supported and accurate. PGCPS’ TPA contracts
allowed for periodic independent third-party audits of the accuracy and
validity of claim reimbursements paid by PGCPS. For example, no audits
were obtained for claims paid by the TPA for self-insured medical, vision, and
dental claims and the last pharmacy claims audit was for fiscal year 2020.
The audits are significant as they can identify amounts due to PGCPS. For
example, the aforementioned pharmacy audit disclosed PGCPS was owed
$2.1 million for unpaid discount guarantees and prescription rebates.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that PGCPS
a. obtain and review supporting documentation to ensure the propriety of
TPA billings, and
b. obtain and review healthcare audits in accordance with its contract and
take appropriate corrective action for any deficiencies identified.
36

--- Page 39 ---
Finding 16
PGCPS did not apply for available School Resource Officer (SRO) grant
funding through the Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) to offset the
cost of school resource officers for fiscal years 2021 through 2024.
Analysis
PGCPS did not apply for available School Resource Officer (SRO) grant funding
through the Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) to offset the cost of
school resource officers for fiscal years 2021 through 2024. According to MCSS
records, PGCPS last applied for SRO grant funds in fiscal year 2020 when $1.5
million was awarded and only $450,000 was reimbursed based on PGCPS
reported allowable costs.
Our review of MCSS records, disclosed that 19 of the 24 LEAs (or public safety
offices within the LEA’s county) were awarded SRO grants in fiscal year 2022.
PGCPS management advised that it did not apply for SRO grants funds after
fiscal year 2020 due to the restrictive nature of the grants and the concern that
there was a lack of law enforcement officers available to execute the scope of
work required under the grant. However, PGCPS could not provide evidence to
support these assertions. According to PGCPS records, its Office of Safety and
Security had 255 employees with related salaries and benefits totaling $20 million
in fiscal year 2024.
MCSS administers the School Resource Officer (SRO) grant program established
in State law that is designated for LEAs to offset costs for hiring School Resource
Officers.16 LEA grant allowances are determined every fiscal year and depend on
the number of schools in the school district. LEAs must apply to use their grant
allowance, and funds must supplement, not supplant, LEA funding for SROs.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that PGCPS apply for available funding from MCSS grants
in the future to offset the costs for hiring school resource officers.
16 Chapter 30, 2018 Laws of Maryland.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Prince George’s County Public
Schools (PGCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
which generally requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school
systems to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management
practices. This performance audit was performed in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the PGCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the PGCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of PGCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in
accordance with the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas
included revenue and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements,
human resources and payroll, equipment control, information technology security
and control, facilities, transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the
management of other risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on PGCPS dated March 11, 2019,
was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for
each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the PGCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
38

--- Page 41 ---
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by PGCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
PGCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of PGCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2021 to June 30, 2023.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
PGCPS’ financial statements.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the PGCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
PGCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
39

--- Page 42 ---
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to PGCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
PGCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to PGCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from April 2023 to January 2024. PGCPS’ response
to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report.
Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity
findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise PGCPS regarding the results of our review of its response.
40

--- Page 43 ---
APPENDIX
March 21, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Pursuant to State Government Article §2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and the Joint Audit Committee Policy on
Agency Responses to Reports Issued by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA), please find the enclosed Management
Responses to the draft Financial Management Practices Audit Report.
Prince George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) view these audits as an opportunity for evaluation of our performance and
for systemic improvement. We found the work of the OLA auditors to be constructive, collaborative and invaluable in
identifying, prioritizing, and correcting our operational deficits. We believe that our collective work with you and your
findings will help PGCPS to improve services to schools, students and families of our county.
If you have any questions about our submission, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Millard House, II
Superintendent of Schools
Enclosure

--- Page 44 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not incorporated into
PGCPS’ procurement policies and were not consistently used when participating in
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA).
We recommend that PGCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirements and
other identified and acknowledged best practices into its procurement policies and ensure
that the performance of the requirements and best practices are documented when
evaluating and participating in ICPAs (repeat).
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any The Purchasing Department agrees that during the sample period,
concerns with factual PGCPS was not consistent in awarding Intergovernmental Cooperative
accuracy. Purchasing Agreements. The Board Policy and Administrative
Procedures do not provide the level of detail that is documented in the
Purchasing and Supply Manual.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: various
Please provide details Purchasing will update the PGCPS Purchasing and Supply Services
of corrective action or Procedures Manual to include Cooperative Agreement Best Practices,
explain disagreement. and update both the Board Policy and Administrative Policy to include a
link to the Purchasing and Supply Services Manual. Additionally,
PGCPS Purchasing revised current Contract Administrative practices
and documents to improve consistency and compliance with Cooperative
Agreement contract awards.
A. Policy. PGCPS Purchasing is drafting a revision to the Purchasing
and Supply Services Procedure Manual, Section 11 Other Jurisdictions
Contracts & Cooperative Agreements to include nationally recognized
procurement Best Practices from NGIP (The Institute for Public
Procurement) Global Best Practice Strategic Use of Cooperative
Procurement dated August 2023. The estimated completion date is
September 2025.
B. Contract Administration: PGCPS implemented use of the Source
Selection Memo (SSM) effective January 2025. The Source Selection
Memo provides pertinent information pertaining to the procurement.
Source Selection Memos will not be a requirement for Sole Source or
Emergency Procurements.
Page 1 of 20

--- Page 45 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
C. Contract Administration: PGCPS is reviewing other LEA
Cooperative Agreement Checklists to implement a PGCPS ICPA
Checklist. The estimated completion date is September 2025.
D. Policy: Revise Board Policy 3323 and Administrative Policy 3323 to
include a line to the Purchasing and Supply Service Manual. The
estimated completion date is September 2025.
Page 2 of 20

--- Page 46 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
PGCPS did not always prepare required written justifications, obtain Board approval, or
publish contract awards for sole source procurements on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required.
We recommend that PGCPS
a. ensure that sole source contract justifications are prepared as required (repeat);
b. obtain Board approval for contracts as required by (repeat); and
c. publish sole source contract awards on eMMA as required.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any The Purchasing Department agrees that during the sample period,
concerns with factual PGCPS was not consistent in providing the Board of Education with a
accuracy. list of contracts for acknowledgment or approval.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/2025
Please provide details A. Written Justification. PGCPS previously implemented use of a Sole
of corrective action or Source Justification Form to document the determination to award Sole
explain disagreement. Source contract awards. Additionally, PGCPS Purchasing implemented
use of the attached Source Selection Memo (SSM) effective January
2025.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/2025
Please provide details B. PGCPS Board Approval: PGCPS Purchasing reports contract awards
of corrective action or to the Board bi-annually. The Bi-Annual Report lists all contract awards
explain disagreement. to include the manner of procurement, vendor, and award amount. The
bi-annual report also lists the contracts by type i.e., RFP, IFB, Task
Order, Rider, ICPA, Sole Source and Emergency procurements.
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/2025
Please provide details C. eMMA. Sec. 21.05.05.04. Record of Sole Source Procurement
of corrective action or requires that PGCPS Purchasing publish notice of sole source contract
explain disagreement. awards of $50,000 and above in eMMA not more than 30 days after the
execution and approval of the contract. PGCPS Board Policy 3323
allows for curriculum instructional materials, professional services, and
training contracts to be entered into without the requirement to conduct
procurement on a competitive basis. PGCPS contracts awarded pursuant
to Board Policy 3323 represent one of the largest contract award
categories for PGCPS. While PGCPS posts solicited contract awards in
eMMA and on the PGCPS website, PGCPS Purchasing has not
consistently posted sole source contract awards to eMMA and the
Page 3 of 20

--- Page 47 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
PGCPS website, based on the volume of PGCPS sole source contract
awards.
Corrective Actions:
(1) PGCPS Purchasing is reviewing current practices to revise and
implement detailed Procurement Checklists that will include the upload
of awarded contracts to eMMA and the PGCPS website by May 2025
for new contracts.
Page 4 of 20

--- Page 48 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
PGCPS did not execute formal written contracts and did not obtain approval from the
Board for special education services.
We recommend that PGCPS
a. modify its Procurement Policy to require formal written contracts for special
education services; and
b. comply with its Policy by obtaining Board approval for special education services.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details PGCPS Purchasing Policy will be modified to require formal written
of corrective action or contracts documenting the costs, nature, and number of services
explain disagreement. provided to the student be executed with each non-public school where
we place a student, however, there will be no competitive bidding
required.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details PGCPS Purchasing Policy will be amended to include language that
of corrective action or states that an annual submission to the Board would be provided which
explain disagreement. includes a comprehensive list of all approved nonpublic placements
including the basis costs of each approved nonpublic placement and at
the conclusion of the fiscal year, a report detailing all of the nonpublic
expenditures for that fiscal year, will be submitted to the Board.
Page 5 of 20

--- Page 49 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4
PGCPS did not analyze, or otherwise limit, the number of time records supervisors were
reviewing and approving. We identified certain supervisors who routinely approved a
large number of time records each pay period.
We recommend that PGCPS analyze its current supervisory responsibilities for approving
timecards and agreeing them to supporting documentation, and to the extent practical,
reduce the number of timecards these individuals are responsible for approving (repeat).
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any PGCPS acknowledges the recommendation to analyze and potentially
concerns with factual reduce the number of timecards supervisors are responsible for
accuracy. approving. However, due to current system limitations, we are unable to
implement this change. Our existing systems are designed to handle the
current workload based on the supervisor on record, and any
modifications would require significant system upgrades and resource
allocation.
Additionally, implementing this recommendation would necessitate a
change in the supervisor on record, which is not feasible due to other
areas of concern linked to the named supervisor, such as the employee's
evaluation. The current supervisory structure is essential for maintaining
the integrity and consistency of employee evaluations and other related
responsibilities.
Currently, there is a process for a time approvers to delegate timecards to
an alternate person position such as assistant principal, supervisors
and/or managers. This can occur when an assigned time approver is
unable to approve timecards because of long term illnesses, vacations,
out of building assignments, vacancies, or other reasons that prevent the
assigned time approver from completing this responsibility. Any
alternative time approver must complete time approver training before
being assigned time approval responsibilities and must meet required
continuing professional education activities.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2027
Page 6 of 20

--- Page 50 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Please provide details Due to current system limitations, PGCPS is not able to reassign
of corrective action or timecards to personnel without impacting other areas of concern, such as
explain disagreement. an employee’s evaluation. Currently, the system only allows one
supervisor on record. The supervisor on record drives the entire
employee record which includes leave requests, evaluations, timecards,
expense requests, etc. We will explore potential system enhancements in
2026. This recommendation will be addressed in the assessment process
of the new system capabilities. We will advocate for the new system to
have timecard delegation to handle multiple levels of approvals.
Page 7 of 20

--- Page 51 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not subject to a documented
independent supervisory review, resulting in one employee being overpaid $7.4 million
without detection.
We recommend that PGCPS
a. perform and document independent supervisory reviews and approvals of critical
human resource and payroll transactions, including manual payroll adjustments, salary
adjustments and related output reports, to ensure that the transactions are supported
by appropriate documentation (repeat); and
b. review previously processed pay adjustments for propriety and take corrective action
for any overpayments.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any a. PGCPS has implemented several preventive measures to improve
concerns with factual payroll accuracy and efficiency. These include enhanced training
accuracy. for staff and systems enhancements to prevent inaccurate data
entry errors, and increased reviews and reporting of payroll
transactions. These measures aim to ensure accurate and reliable
payroll processes, reducing the risk of overpayments and ensuring
correct employee compensation.
b. Two (2) additional team members were added to review pay
adjustments. Secondary reviews are already in place for pay
adjustments that are above the biweekly rate of pay. Corrective
action has been taken and will continue to be taken for
overpayments that were caused by staff.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 12, 2023
Please provide details Preventive measures were established to prevent inaccurate amounts or
of corrective action or data from being entered into the payroll fields. Additional staff, to
explain disagreement. include supervisory level staff, were assigned in the independent review
process for salary adjustments calculations. Additional reports were
developed to capture discrepancies for biweekly and substitute payrolls
and additional payroll runs.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2026
Page 8 of 20

--- Page 52 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Please provide details IT implemented a data catch point for payroll fields to ensure data entry
of corrective action or is accurate upon entry, including reviewing previously processed pay
explain disagreement. adjustment for propriety. Currently we are working on an automated
process to calculate salary adjustments, payout amounts, and retroactive
payments. Any staff member will be held accountable for overpayments
that were caused by their inaccurate entries. Corrective action will be
provided following the defined PGCPS disciplinary action process.
Page 9 of 20

--- Page 53 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
Internal controls and record keeping for the bus driver payrolls were not adequate to
ensure the propriety of payroll payments.
We recommend PGCPS ensure
a. that a standard time reporting process for documenting transportation employees’ time
worked (such as timesheets or time clock) is implemented and that related supporting
documents or records are retained (repeat); and
b. all overtime is properly supported and approved in accordance with PGCPS
procedures (repeat).
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2024
Please provide details Transportation Services has revised the daily operational payroll process
of corrective action or to enhance accuracy and accountability. This includes clearly defining
explain disagreement. the roles and responsibilities of staff involved in payroll entry, review,
and approval. To support these improvements, Transportation Services
has initiated a review of electronic logging systems with current vendors
to enhance payroll tracking and reporting. Additionally, a monthly audit
sample review of overtime reports is being implemented. This review
utilizes GPS data and internal documentation to verify the accuracy of
overtime payments and ensure compliance with payroll procedures.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2024
Please provide details Transportation Services implemented practices from Board Policy 2600
of corrective action or Records and Documents Management Program. Transportation Services
explain disagreement. has developed and implemented a training plan to ensure efficacy is
reached.
Page 10 of 20

--- Page 54 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
PGCPS did not always perform a newly required screening for positions involving direct
contact with minors.
We recommend that PGCPS comply with State law and perform and document the
required screening for positions involving direct contact with minors, including those noted
above.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any Agreed in part (7/10 instances).
concerns with factual
accuracy. In 2022-23, the Background Unit relied on a manual process to extract
and send the required forms to previous employers. This process
required forms individually emailed to prior employers. This process
was monitored by a background unit employee who did not send forms
to prior employers, and/or failed to follow up with those employers that
did not return a completed form.
In October 2023:
In 6 out of 10 instances, there was no documentation of prior employer
requests.
In 1 out of 10 instances, a decision was made that requests did not need
to be sent to international employers.
In 3 out of 10 instances, the employees did not have prior employment
that involved direct contact with minors. There is no violation here.
PGCPS went back and attempted to secure prior employer forms in 6 out
of 7 instances. No attempt was made for the international employer.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: February 20,
2025
Please provide details PGCPS will begin sending complaints to MSDE in instances where prior
of corrective action or employers do not return the required form. PGCPS has historically not
explain disagreement. sent complaints to the state regarding the lack of return of the forms,
which would address the lack of return, and provide PGCPS with
additional documentation of the attempts to secure the form.
Attempts will be made to secure responses from the international
employer in 1 out of 7 instances noted above. There is no apparent
language in the law that makes a distinction between domestic or foreign
employers. Forms will be sent for all.
Page 11 of 20

--- Page 55 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Additionally, as of August 2024, the process has been moved fully into
e-signature services, which allows for better tracking and ease of
recipient employer signature and return. Our selected e-signature
service also sends out automatic reminders until completed. The
automatic reminder timeline was updated effective February 20, 2025, to
align with the 60-day window that MSDE allows.
The Background Unit is exploring a manageable process for filing
MSDE complaints for unreturned forms. Ongoing
Page 12 of 20

--- Page 56 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Equipment Control and Accountability
Finding 8
PGCPS did not complete physical inventories of equipment every three years and resolve
missing items from technology equipment inventories in a timely manner as required.
We recommend that PGCPS
a. conduct physical inventories of equipment every three years in accordance with its
Assets Operating Manual, (repeat) and
b. investigate and resolve missing equipment items identified during physical inventories,
including those items noted above.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2029
Please provide details IT agrees with the OLA audit recommendation that a physical inventory
of corrective action or of equipment be conducted every three years in accordance with the
explain disagreement. PGCPS Assets Operating Manual. Therefore, beginning Summer 2024,
IT's Hardware Inventory team began conducting physical inventories of
students' electronic devices at each school. In Spring 2025, IT will
conduct a physical inventory of other classroom technologies to include
interactive flat panels. IT is finalizing a plan to be completed in Fall of
2025 to conduct physical inventories of all technologies every three
years, in all schools and central offices to align with the Assets
Operating Manual. The plan will be implemented beginning January
2026 with an estimated completion of January 2029.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2029
Please provide details IT agrees with the OLA audit recommendation to investigate and resolve
of corrective action or missing equipment items identified during physical inventories,
explain disagreement. including those items noted above. Therefore, beginning in Spring 2024,
with guidance from Internal Audit, IT developed an Attestation and
Inventory Loss Form to list missing equipment identified during physical
inventories of schools. Once the Attestation and Inventory Loss form is
reviewed and signed by the building administrator, missing equipment
items from schools are removed from the building's inventory in asset
management. IT will document and replicate a similar process to
Page 13 of 20

--- Page 57 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
investigate and resolve missing equipment from central offices
beginning in January 2026, with an estimated completion of January
2029.
Page 14 of 20

--- Page 58 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Technology section,
including Findings 9 through 11 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are
subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the findings, including the analysis,
related recommendation(s), along with PGCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this report
copy, PGCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 15 of 20

--- Page 59 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 12
PGCPS improperly used an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA)
to procure a school bus camera system contract resulting in a lack of assurance that it
obtained the best value.
We recommend that, in the future, PGCPS
a. competitively procure transportation contracts or comply with State law when using
ICPAs, and
b. ensure the basis and reasoning for revenue sharing and technology fees are
documented in future school bus safety camera contracts.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any Prince George's County Public Schools (PGCPS) has entered a
concerns with factual Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with a vendor to equip the
accuracy. Department of Transportation with external enforcement cameras,
ground traffic control, software tracking capabilities, violation
processing, and GPS monitoring. This MOU was chosen by the Chief
Executive Officer because it met the operational needs of the
transportation department and provided the best system based on those
needs. Since the agreement, the vendor has supplied internal cameras,
routing system, and GPS services to support transportation operations.
Recommendation 12a Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2025
Please provide details Going forward, PGCPS will work to ensure that all transportation
of corrective action or contracts comply with State law when utilizing Interlocal Cooperation
explain disagreement. Agreements (ICPAs) utilizing the recommendations mentioned in
Finding #1.
Recommendation 12b Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2025
Please provide details Going forward, PGCPS will document the basis and reasoning for
of corrective action or revenue sharing and technology fees in future school bus safety camera
explain disagreement. contracts.
Page 16 of 20

--- Page 60 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Finding 13
PGCPS did not use its automated bus routing software to periodically perform a system-
wide analysis of routes and related bus capacities to maximize efficiency. In addition,
PGCPS had not established comprehensive bus routing procedures.
We recommend that PGCPS take steps to use its buses more efficiently. Specifically, we
recommend that PGCPS
a. use automated bus routing software to periodically perform a system-wide analysis of
bus routes to maximize the ridership on its bus routes (repeat); and
b. establish comprehensive bus routing procedures that specify target bus capacities,
ridership goals, and student ride-time limits (repeat).
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2024
Please provide details PGCPS secured a new routing system that enabled the department to
of corrective action or create routes with defined start/end times that provided the necessary
explain disagreement. information for maximum efficiency and budget terms. As new
leadership is in place, the department has prioritized creating routing
procedures.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2024
Please provide details The new routing system allows PGCPS to establish seat capacity limits,
of corrective action or set maximum ridership goals, and define ride time limits. Reports are
explain disagreement. generated to ensure accuracy. Due to ongoing bus driver shortages, trips
are continuously reviewed for optimal efficiency.
Page 17 of 20

--- Page 61 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
OLA has determined that Finding 14 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance
and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore
is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including the analysis,
related recommendation(s), along with PGCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this report
copy, PGCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 14
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 18 of 20

--- Page 62 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 15
PGCPS did not obtain and review claim data to support amounts invoiced by its third-
party administrators (TPA) or audit healthcare claims activity paid by the TPA to ensure
they were proper.
We recommend that PGCPS
a. obtain and review supporting documentation to ensure the propriety of TPA billings;
and
b. obtain and review healthcare audits in accordance with its contract and take
appropriate corrective action for any deficiencies identified.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 1, 2025
Please provide details PGCPS will identify an external Accounting Firm specializing in self-
of corrective action or insured health plans to conduct a best practice claims and eligibility
explain disagreement. audit each calendar year.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 1, 2025
Please provide details PGCPS will identify an external Accounting Firm specializing in self-
of corrective action or insured health plans to conduct a best practice claims and eligibility
explain disagreement. audit each calendar year.
Page 19 of 20

--- Page 63 ---
Prince George’s County Public School System
Agency Response Form
Finding 16
PGCPS did not apply for available School Resource Officer (SRO) grant funding through
the Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) to offset the cost of school resource officers
for fiscal years 2021 through 2024.
We recommend that PGCPS apply for available funding from MCSS grants in the future
to offset the costs for hiring school resource officers.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details The Office of School Safety and Security will coordinate with the police
of corrective action or department and apply for MCSS grants in the future to offset costs.
explain disagreement.
Page 20 of 20

--- Page 64 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
James M. Fowler, CFE
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Peter W. Chong, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Tari J. Covington
Ali A. Dayya
Mia W. Foelster
Hilary B. Gugig
Brian M. Webbert
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Charles O. Price
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors