Title: Department of Information Technology - Follow-up Review
Date: 03/25/2025
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67e6b169fc08946efd2c7d6e
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:18:21.007176
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
March 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has
been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section
35.107 of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed
to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400

--- Page 3 ---
March 25, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a follow-up review of actions taken by the Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) to address the findings in our March 29, 2024
audit report. In that report, we concluded that DoIT’s accountability and
compliance rating was unsatisfactory.
DoIT provided a status report, as of August 15, 2024, indicating the
implementation status of each of the 16 findings as well as its corrective action
plan, including timelines and processes to monitor the implementation of the plan.
For the 12 non-cybersecurity-related findings, DoIT’s status report indicated that
all recommendations were fully implemented for 4 findings and that additional
corrective actions were required to fully implement some or all of the
recommendations for 5 findings. For the remaining 3 non-cybersecurity-related
findings, DoIT did not provide a status and advised us that it did not plan to
implement the recommendations since it disagreed with the findings.
Based on our assessment of the relative significance of the 16 findings, we
performed certain procedures to evaluate the appropriateness of actions taken by
DoIT for 10 non-cybersecurity-related findings, including the 4 findings DoIT
had reported as being corrected and the 3 findings that DoIT disagreed with and
did not provide a status. Our review, which was performed during the period
from November 2024 to January 2025, disclosed that DoIT had made progress,
but had not resolved some or all of the recommendations in the 10 non-
cybersecurity-related findings.

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 identifies DoIT’s assessed implementation status for the 12 non-
cybersecurity-related findings, according to the status report, as well as the results
of our review for 10 non-cybersecurity-related findings. Exhibit 2 describes, in
detail, the results of our review of the status of DoIT’s efforts to implement the
recommendations for the 10 non-cybersecurity-related findings that we
determined DoIT had not fully resolved (fully corrected). To obtain a thorough
understanding of the audit findings, recommendations, and the follow-up status
described in Exhibit 2, the original March 29, 2024 audit report should be
consulted due to the technical nature of some of these findings.
Appendix A includes DoIT’s status report as of August 15, 2024. DoIT’s
response to our assessment of the status is included in Appendix B. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted any cybersecurity-related elements in these
appendices.
DoIT’s response notes pervasive disagreement with our conclusions and several
assertions that our comments were factually inaccurate. We reviewed DoIT’s
responses and stand by the facts presented in Exhibit 2 which were factually
accurate based upon documentation DoIT was able to provide during our
fieldwork.
The status of all of the audit findings will be subject to review during our next
audit of DoIT. Furthermore, DoIT will be required to submit quarterly status
reports to this Office for all 16 findings as required by State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the review by DoIT.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the March 2024
DoIT Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
DoIT as of Auditor’s Review
August 20241
Major Information Technology Development Projects
(MITDPs)
1. (Policy Issue) The Department of Information In Progress
In Progress
Technology (DoIT) should assume greater (see Exhibit 2)
oversight responsibility to ensure that MITDPs
were completed on time and on budget.
2. DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to
ensure they were on budget and on schedule and In Progress
Corrected
that changes to the scope and cost of the project (see Exhibit 2)
were appropriate.
3. DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate
In Progress
oversight project managers (OPMs) hired through Corrected
(see Exhibit 2)
vendors to oversee MITDPs.
4. DoIT could not support cost data and
conclusions included in its annual report submitted
to the Governor, Department of Budget and
In Progress
Management, and General Assembly; and did not Corrected
(see Exhibit 2)
always include changes in schedule, cost, and other
identified problems with MITDPs, as required by
State law.
MD THINK
5. DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the
increase in MD THINK costs from the initial
In Progress
$166.4 million to $588.8 million and delays in the Not Provided2
(see Exhibit 2)
system implementation, which as of November
2023 was estimated to be approximately three years
behind the initial project completion date.
6. DoIT did not ensure that Independent Verification
and Validation assessments findings were resolved In Progress
Not Provided2
timely by the Department of Human Services and (see Exhibit 2)
the MD THINK Executive Committee.
Page 1 of 3
1 DoIT’s implementation status for each finding is based upon DoIT’s status report, as of August
15, 2024, as shown in Appendix A.
2 DoIT did not provide a current status for the finding. See additional comments in Exhibit 2.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the March 2024
DoIT Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
DoIT as of Auditor’s Review
August 20243
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)
7. DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the
In Progress
development and implementation of eMMA Not Provided4
(see Exhibit 2)
resulting in significant delays and changes to the
cost and scope of the project.
networkMaryland
8. (Policy Issue) DoIT used the networkMaryland
Not Provided/In In Progress
contract to award significant work unrelated to
Progress5 (see Exhibit 2)
networkMaryland without considering a
competitive procurement process.
9. DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for
agency staff augmentation services under the In Progress
In Progress
networkMaryland contract and documentation of
(see Exhibit 2)
certain work orders could not be provided.
10. DoIT issued work orders to the networkMaryland
vendor for cybersecurity remediation services
totaling approximately $25 million that were not
In Progress
sufficiently detailed and did not adequately ensure Corrected
(see Exhibit 2)
that all $11.5 million invoiced by the vendor was
related to work performed on behalf of DoIT work
orders.
Information Systems Security and Control and
Enterprise Services6
11. Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. Status Redacted Status Redacted
12. Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. Status Redacted Status Redacted
13. Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. Status Redacted Status Redacted
Page 2 of 3
3 DoIT’s implementation status for each finding is based upon DoIT’s status report, as of August
15, 2024, as shown in Appendix A.
4 DoIT did not provide a current status for the finding. See additional comments in Exhibit 2.
5 DoIT’s status did not provide a response for recommendation a and b and indicated
recommendation c was in progress.
6 Specific information related to cybersecurity-related findings 11 through 14 have been redacted
for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i)
of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the March 2024
DoIT Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
DoIT as of Auditor’s Review
August 20247
14. Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. Status Redacted Status Redacted
Enterprise Technology Support Services (ETSS)
15. DoIT did not have formal written agreements with
57 of the 130 State and local entities receiving In Progress N/A
ETSS and did not recover $4.8 million from nine
entities with agreements for services provided.
Equipment
16. DoIT did not adequately control its equipment
In Progress N/A
inventory and did not maintain accurate detail
records.
Page 3 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding.
7 DoIT’s implementation status for each finding is based upon DoIT’s status report, as of August
15, 2024, as shown in Appendix A.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 2
Detailed Comments on the March 2024 Audit Report Findings
for Which the Office of Legislative Audits Deemed the
Implementation Status to be “In Progress”
Major Information Technology Development Projects (MITDPs)
Prior Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) should assume greater
oversight responsibility to ensure that MITDPs were completed on time and
on budget.
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommended that DoIT take the necessary steps to establish adequate
safeguards to ensure the successful implementation of MITDPs, especially when
delegating key aspects of MITDP oversight. For example, DoIT should verify
that State agencies have appropriate qualified personnel with sufficient technical
knowledge, assist with MITDP contract procurements and subsequent contract
modifications, and periodically review MITDP expenditures for compliance with
contract terms.
Status as Determined by DoIT – In Progress
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT did not fully implement the recommendation. In response to our
recommendation, DoIT enhanced agency monthly status updates presented to
DoIT to include detailed information and risks for all MITDPs and help identify
projects that require DoIT’s intervention. However, our review disclosed that
DoIT did not develop a process to verify that State agencies have appropriate
qualified personnel with sufficient technical knowledge and did not establish a
process to review MITDP expenditures for compliance with contract terms.
In regard to assisting with MITDP contract procurements and subsequent contract
modifications, DoIT advised that it now requires State agencies to obtain approval
from DoIT’s procurement officers for all information technology (IT) services,
including contracts related to MITDPs. However, our review disclosed that the
employees approving these contracts were not the employees responsible for
monitoring these projects. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that the
contracts were appropriate for the successful implementation of MITDPs.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Prior Finding 2
DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they were on budget and
on schedule and that changes to the scope and cost of the project were
appropriate.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure annual Information Technology Project Requests (ITPRs) are
submitted by State agencies, and that DoIT reviews and approves them prior
to submitting it to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the
Department of Legislative Services for budget analysis purposes (repeat);
b. review the methodology and basis for estimated costs and schedules on ITPRs
to ensure these estimates appear reasonable and are supported;
c. obtain and review explanations for significant changes, such as increases in
project costs;
d. require the oversight project managers (OPMs) to ensure monthly health
assessments are provided by State agencies, verify the accuracy of
information reported, and provide justifications for the risk ratings (repeat);
and
e. review and approve changes in scope, cost, and schedule, as required by its
policy.
Status as Determined by DoIT – Corrected
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT implemented recommendation a, but did not fully implement
recommendations b and d, and did not make any progress on recommendations c
and e. Specifically, our review disclosed the following:
For recommendation b, our test of five Information Technology Project Requests
(ITPRs)8 with an estimated project cost totaling $452 million, disclosed that DoIT
did not review three projects, with estimated project costs totaling $67 million, for
the methodology and basis for estimated costs and schedules to ensure these
estimates appeared reasonable and are supported.
For recommendation c, our test of two of the aforementioned projects9 for which
the estimated project costs increased by $82 million from the preceding year
8 The five ITPRs we tested were eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA), Child Support
Management System (CSMS), Child, Juvenile, and Adult Management Application (CJAMS),
Eligibility and Enrollment (E&E), and Financial Management Information System
Modernization (FMIS).
9 The two MITDPs we tested were FMIS and eMMA.
7

--- Page 10 ---
disclosed that DoIT did not obtain and review explanations for significant
increases.
For recommendation d, in June 2024 DoIT developed written guidance for
evaluating monthly health assessments. However, this guidance only provides
instructions on how to rate the project, it did not indicate the actions DoIT should
take if monthly health assessments are not submitted or if DoIT cannot verify the
accuracy of information reported. Our test of monthly health assessments for four
MITDPs10 for the period between July and November 2024, disclosed that DoIT
did not receive any health assessments for three MITDPs administered by the
Department of Human Services (DHS) totaling $67 million. In January 2025,
DoIT advised that DHS and the project teams have been unresponsive. However,
DoIT did not take any corrective action, such as restricting funding, as its policy
did not include guidance for non-compliant agencies.
For recommendation e, our aforementioned test of the two MITDPs with price
increases disclosed that DoIT did not review and approve changes in scope, cost,
and schedule, as required by its policy.
Prior Finding 3
DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate OPMs hired through
vendors to oversee MITDPs.
Prior Report Recommendation 3
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure performance evaluations adequately demonstrate that OPMs were
satisfactorily performing their job duties (such as including specific comments
that justify the ratings) and meeting expectations;
b. develop written definitions and criteria, similar to DBM Performance
Planning and Evaluation Program Guidelines noted above, that define each
performance area and rating category to ensure evaluations are an effective
tool to monitor the OPMs in an observable, measurable, and objective
manner; and
c. retain the performance evaluations and take corrective action when OPMs
performance is unsatisfactory.
Status as Determined by DoIT – Corrected
10 We tested three MITDPs administered by DHS (CSMS, CJAMS, E&E), and one administered
by the Comptroller of Maryland (FMIS Modernization).
8

--- Page 11 ---
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT implemented recommendations b and c, but did not fully implement
recommendation a. While DoIT enhanced the performance evaluation form to
include detailed questions about job performance, they did not adequately
document OPMs11 were satisfactorily performing their job duties and meeting
expectations. Specifically, our test of 15 performance evaluations for 5 OPMs in
calendar year 2024 disclosed that none had any comments by the DoIT supervisor
to justify the rating.
Prior Finding 4
DoIT could not support cost data and conclusions included in its annual
report submitted to the Governor, DBM, and General Assembly; and did not
always include changes in schedule, cost, and other identified problems with
MITDPs, as required by State law.
Prior Report Recommendation 4
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure that its annual reports include accurate estimated costs to complete
(repeat) and retain documentation to support the amounts reported; and
b. accurately report known or anticipated changes in schedule, cost, and scope
and provide a summary of problems identified by an external review, as
required by State law.
Status as Determined by DoIT – Corrected
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT did not fully implement the recommendations. Specifically, our review of
four MITDPs12 in the fiscal year 2024 annual report disclosed the following:
For recommendation a, DoIT was unable to provide documentation to support the
estimated costs to complete reported in its annual report for two projects totaling
$341.3 million.
For recommendation b, while DoIT accurately reported known or anticipated
changes in schedule, cost, and scope, it did not always provide a summary of
problems identified by an external review. Specifically, one annual report did not
include 5 high risk issues included in an April 2024 Independent Verification and
11 Subsequent to our March 2024 audit, DoIT changed the name of OPMs to Oversight
Administrators (OAs).
12 The four MITDPs we reviewed were MD THINK, Medicaid Management Information System
II, eMMA, and FMIS Modernization.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Validation (IV&V) assessment for the MD THINK project, which as of December
2024, had remained open from 8 to 37 months.
MD THINK
Prior Finding 5
DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the increase in MD THINK
costs from the initial $166.4 million to $588.8 million and delays in the system
implementation, which as of November 2023 was estimated to be
approximately three years behind the initial project completion date.
Prior Report Recommendation 5
We recommended that DoIT, in accordance with State law, and in conjunction
with the MD THINK Executive Committee,
a. monitor the project to ensure that costs, functionality, and delivery dates are
consistent with the terms of the contracts or adequately justified if significant
variances are necessary; and
b. ensure the project is fully implemented or take immediate corrective actions.
Status as Determined by DoIT – Status Not Provided
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT did not make any progress on recommendation a and did not fully
implement recommendation b.
For recommendation a, DoIT did not monitor the project to ensure that costs,
functionality, and delivery dates are consistent with the terms of the contracts or
adequately justified if significant variances are necessary. For example, DoIT
could not provide an explanation for the increase in MD THINK costs which
increased by $138.7 million (24 percent) since the fiscal year 2022 annual report.
DoIT also did not provide an explanation for why the completion date for the
project was not consistent with the terms of the contracts.
In response to recommendation b, in fiscal year 2025, DoIT closed the MD
THINK project and created three separate MITDPs.13 These MITDPs represent
the three major systems that are hosted on the MD THINK platform. We were
advised that DoIT is still assessing these projects to determine if development is
complete as all three systems have been in operation since September 2022.
13 The three MITDPs that replaced the MD THINK project are: CJAMS, E&E; and CSMS.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Despite the ongoing assessment, in September 2024, DoIT approved an additional
$67.1 million for further development on these projects.
Prior Finding 6
DoIT did not ensure that IV&V findings were resolved timely by DHS and
the MD THINK Executive Committee.
Prior Report Recommendation 6
We recommended that DoIT ensure critical findings from IV&V project
assessment reports for MD THINK are resolved timely, including those noted
above.
Status as Determined by DoIT – Status Not Provided
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT advised us that it continues to disagree with the recommendation as it does
not believe it has statutory authority to ensure DHS timely resolves IV&V
findings. Despite this disagreement, DoIT reported that it ensures that IV&V
findings are communicated and continuously reviews IV&V results and
implementation of recommended actions to assess project changes and
continuation.
According to the most recent IV&V assessment, which was completed in April
2024, 17 of 269 issues were open, including 5 high-risk issues that as of
December 2024, had remained open from 8 to 37 months. This is an
improvement from the results in our March 2024 report, which noted that as of
May 2022, 33 of 251 issues were considered open, including 15 high-risk issues,
14 of which had remained open from 3 to 27 months. DoIT needs to continue to
work with the agencies to ensure IV&V findings are resolved timely, including
the aforementioned 5 long-standing high-risk issues.
11

--- Page 14 ---
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)
Prior Finding 7
DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the development and
implementation of eMMA resulting in significant delays and changes to the
cost and scope of the project.
Prior Report Recommendation 7
We recommended that DoIT provide significant oversight and direction over
eMMA. In particular DoIT should ensure
a. eMMA is completed in accordance with the most recently approved schedule
and budget;
b. issues identified by the monthly health assessments and the IV&Vs are
resolved, including developing an overall project schedule with defined tasks
and a standardized method of tracking percentage of completion is used; and
c. based on its own IT project expertise, proactively identify other actions
intended to encourage vendor resolution of the current eMMA issues and
ensure the Department of General Services (DGS) complies with the terms of
its contract.
Status as Determined by DoIT – Status Not Provided
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT advised us that it continues to disagree with the recommendations to
provide oversight and direction for the eMMA project, as it does not believe it has
statutory authority to provide significant oversight and direction. Despite this
position, DoIT advised us that in March 2023, it paused the development of
eMMA. In addition, in April 2024, DoIT officially placed the project on hold and
is working with the DGS to determine the next steps.
networkMaryland
Prior Finding 8
DoIT used the networkMaryland contract to award significant work
unrelated to networkMaryland without considering a competitive
procurement process.
Prior Report Recommendation 8
We recommended that DoIT
12

--- Page 15 ---
a. modify the networkMaryland contract to clearly define the scope and extent of
all services provided;
b. obtain retroactive approval from the Board of Public Works (BPW) for the
current staff augmentation and cybersecurity remediation work orders;
c. for any additional work and in the spirit of its counsel’s legal advice, solicit
secondary competition amongst approved CATS+ contractors for staff
augmentation and cybersecurity remediation services to maximize
competition and help ensure it receives the most advantageous contract terms.
Status as Determined by DoIT – Status Not Provided for recommendations a
and b and In Progress for recommendation c
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT implemented recommendation c, but did not make any progress on
recommendations a and b. DoIT continues to disagree with recommendations a
and b, and does not plan to implement either recommendation. Although DoIT
stated that its contract has been evaluated by its Assistant Attorney General
(AAG), we determined that the services identified in the March 2024 audit report
were outside the scope of the contract. Specifically, DoIT did not modify the
networkMaryland contract to clearly define the scope and extent of all services
provided. Since the issuance of our report in March 2024, DoIT had not issued
any cybersecurity remediation work orders and issued one staff augmentation
work order totaling $316,680. Our review further disclosed that DoIT did not
obtain retroactive approval from BPW for staff augmentation and cybersecurity
remediation work orders.
Prior Finding 9
DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for agency staff augmentation
services under the networkMaryland contract and documentation of certain
work orders could not be provided.
Prior Report Recommendation 9
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure labor hours billed for staff augmentation work orders for other State
agencies are accurate prior to approving invoices for payment,
b. ensure approved work order documentation is maintained, and
c. ensure subcontractors are approved and qualified.
Status as Determined by DoIT – In Progress
13

--- Page 16 ---
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT implemented recommendations a and b, but did not fully implement
recommendation c. Specifically, DoIT established a process to identify
subcontractors associated with the networkMaryland contract and ensure they are
qualified. However, as of December 2024, DoIT advised it was still in the
process of identifying subcontractors currently being used for this contract.
Prior Finding 10
DoIT issued work orders to the networkMaryland vendor for cybersecurity
remediation services totaling approximately $25 million that were not
sufficiently detailed and did not adequately ensure that all $11.5 million
invoiced by the vendor was related to work performed on behalf of DoIT
work orders.
Prior Report Recommendation 10
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure all future cybersecurity remediation work orders and deliverables are
clearly defined and estimated costs correlate to deliverables;
b. ensure labor hours billed are accurate for work completed and properly
supported; and
c. in conjunction with legal counsel, consider the recovery of funds previously
paid for inadequate work product, to the extent practicable.
Status as Determined by DoIT – Corrected
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DoIT did not fully implement recommendations a and b and did not make any
progress on recommendation c.
In regard to recommendation a and b, in May 2023, DoIT ceased cybersecurity
related work with its networkMaryland contractor in order to develop clearer
specifications and defined deliverables. As of November 2024, DoIT was in the
process of procuring a cybersecurity assessment and remediation contract and has
not approved any additional cybersecurity remediation work orders.
In regard to recommendation c, DoIT did not work with its legal counsel to
consider the recovery of funds previously paid for an inadequate work product.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) to address the findings in our March 29, 2024
audit report. In that report, we concluded that DoIT’s fiscal accountability and
compliance rating was unsatisfactory.
The purpose of our review was to determine the status of DoIT’s corrective
actions to address certain of our audit findings and recommendations. As
customary, our review did not include all prior report findings and
recommendations, but a number judgmentally selected based on our assessment
of significance. This review was conducted under the authority of Section 2-
1220(a)(4) of the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
and was based on our long-standing practice of performing a follow-up review
whenever an agency receives an unsatisfactory rating in its fiscal compliance
audit report. The rating system was established, in accordance with State
Government Article, Section 2-1221, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, for the
purpose of determining an overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability
and compliance with State laws and regulations.
Our review consisted of obtaining a status report from DoIT as of August 15,
2024, which described the level of implementation of each prior audit report
finding, as well as obtaining additional clarifications from DoIT of the actions
taken to resolve the selected findings. Our review also consisted of performing
tests and analyses of certain information and holding discussions with DoIT
personnel, as we deemed necessary, to determine the status of DoIT’s corrective
actions to address the selected findings, including the related recommendations,
from our March 29, 2024 audit report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of a report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted version for
the public and an unredacted version for government officials responsible for
acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that findings in this report fall under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available report all specifics as to
15

--- Page 18 ---
the nature of the cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions have been
redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public report. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DoIT and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted report.
This review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, other matters
may have come to our attention that would have been reported.
Our review was conducted primarily during the period from November 2024 to
January 2025, and our assessment of the status of DoIT’s corrective actions was
performed at the time of our review.
DoIT’s response to our follow-up review is included as an appendix to this report.
Depending on the version of the report, responses to any cybersecurity findings
may be redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise DoIT regarding the results of our review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Finding / Recommendation Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation Date Information14
Major Information Technology Development Projects (MITDPs)
Finding 1 – (Policy Issue) DoIT should assume greater oversight responsibility to ensure that MITDPs were completed on
time and on budget.
We recommend that DoIT take the In Progress To date, DoIT has taken the following corrective 12/31/25
necessary steps to establish adequate actions:
safeguards to ensure the successful ● Restarted monthly health check
implementation of MITDPs, especially meetings with DoIT leadership in
when delegating key aspects of MITDP January 2024
oversight. For example, DoIT should ● Hired a new Senior Director of
verify that State agencies have Strategic Investments in June 2024
appropriate qualified personnel with ● Implemented regular status updates to
sufficient technical knowledge, assist leadership of MITDP-owning agencies
with MITDP contract procurements and with specific needed actions in June
subsequent contract modifications, and 2024
periodically review MITDP expenditures
for compliance with contract terms. Based on the learnings from these mitigations, and
the new leadership team, DoIT is undertaking a
broader effort to restructure DoIT’s oversight
processes, including providing enhanced
communication of projects’ status, to help MITDPs
deliver their intended value and use state funds
responsibly.
DoIT is continuing to pursue legislation to give
DoIT more authority and resources to validate
technical skills of agency personnel.
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 20 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the
Finding / Recommendation Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation
Date Information14
Finding 2 – DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they were on budget and on schedule and that changes to
the scope and cost of the project were appropriate.
We recommend that DoIT Complete The current process allows for DoIT review and Complete
a. ensure annual ITPRs are submitted approval of annual ITPRs to be performed in a as of
by State agencies, and that DoIT timely manner, as long as State agencies are 06/30/24
reviews and approves them prior to submitting these reports on time, prior to DBM and
submitting it to DBM and DLS for DLS reviews for budget analysis purposes.
budget analysis purposes (repeat);
DoIT is also pursuing legislation to give DoIT
more authority to hold agencies accountable when
they do not meet oversight requirements, as
defined and set forth in DoIT policy and
procedures, including missing deadlines.
b. review the methodology and basis Complete The estimated costs submitted by agencies on their Complete
for estimated costs and schedules ITPRs are validated as much as possible by as of
on ITPRs to ensure these estimates comparing the estimates to the projects’ contracts 06/30/24
appear reasonable and are and known ongoing expenses. Projects are required
supported; to share their contracts and invoices with DoIT on
an ongoing basis to enable this analysis.
c. obtain and review explanations for Complete DoIT has a defined process for reviewing and Complete
significant changes, such as approving any substantial project changes, as of
increases in project costs; including to scope, cost, or timeline, when 06/30/24
informed of those changes by agencies.
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Finding / Recommendation Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation Date Information14
d. require the OPMs to ensure Complete The monthly health assessment process has been Complete
monthly health assessments are enhanced to provide a green / yellow / red rating on as of
provided by State agencies, defined criteria. 06/30/24
verify the accuracy of Additionally, OAs are independently providing an
information reported, and assessment of the rating to ensure the information
provide justifications for the risk provided by agencies is justified and accurate to
ratings (repeat); and our knowledge. These changes were implemented
in spring 2024.
e. review and approve changes in Complete See 2(c) Complete
scope, cost, and schedule, as as of
required by its 06/30/24
policy.
Finding 3 – DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate oversight project managers (OPMs) hired through vendors to
oversee MITDPs.
We recommend that DoIT Complete A new OA (previously OPM) performance Complete
a. ensure performance evaluations management program was implemented as of as of
adequately demonstrate that March 2024. This program was modeled after the 04/30/24
OPMs were satisfactorily State’s Performance Evaluation Program. Quarterly
performing their job duties (such evaluations now include:
as including specific comments ● Assessment of each OA’s performance of
that justify the ratings) and their critical job duties, which have been
meeting expectations; defined and documented
b. develop written definitions and ● Assessment of each OA’s performance
criteria, similar to DBM against certain behavioral elements, which
Guidelines noted above, that have likewise been defined and
define each performance area documented
and rating category to ensure
evaluations are an effective tool These quarterly assessments are retained to measure
to monitor the OPMs in an performance over time.
observable, measurable, and
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 22 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Finding / Recommendation Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation Date Information14
objective manner; and
c. retain the performance Unsatisfactory performance results in corrective
evaluations and take corrective action up to and including termination of the
action when OPMs performance contractor.
is unsatisfactory.
Finding 4 – DoIT could not support cost data and conclusions included in its annual report submitted to the Governor,
DBM, and General Assembly; and did not always include changes in schedule, cost, and other identified problems with
MITDPs, as required by State law.
We recommend that DoIT Complete DoIT has implemented new review steps of mid- Complete
a. ensure that its annual reports year and
include accurate estimated costs end-of-year reports to ensure that they reflect the
to complete (repeat) and retain latest information DoIT has received on projects.
documentation to support the
amounts reported; and DoIT has taken the following corrective actions:
● Require agencies to include expenditure data in
monthly health checks
● DoIT implemented a monthly review of FMIS
GENT reports of MITDP expenditures to the
agency reported amounts
These new procedures help to ensure actual costs
incurred are reported correctly. This, along with
additional enhancements to processes, as noted in
response to Finding 2, help ensure estimated costs to
complete projects are as accurate as reasonably
possible.
All information used to develop and that support
information in the annual report will be retained for
future reference. In the future, much of this
information will be stored in the new PMIS.
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 23 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Finding / Recommendation Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation Date Information14
Complete DoIT will continue to report all changes in schedule, Complete
b. accurately report known or cost, and scope of projects as conveyed by agencies
anticipated changes in schedule, through our defined policy. In addition, we will
cost, and scope and provide a continue to report on the findings of all external
summary of problems identified reviews.
by an external review, as required
by State law.
Finding 5 – DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the increase in MD THINK costs from the initial $166.4 million to
$588.8 million and delays in the system implementation, which as of November 2023 was estimated to be approximately
three years behind the initial project completion date.
We recommend that DoIT, in accordance N/A DoIT has implemented actions noted in the N/A
with State law, and in conjunction with responses provided for Finding 1 and Finding 2.
the MD THINK Executive Committee, Additionally, regular, standing meetings between
a. monitor the project to ensure DoIT Secretary and MD THINK Executive Director
that costs, functionality, and are held to ensure transparency, open
communication, and to determine best next steps
delivery dates are consistent
with the terms of the contracts or
adequately justified if significant
variances are necessary; and
b. ensure the project is fully
implemented or take immediate
corrective actions.
Finding 6 – DoIT did not ensure that Independent Verification and Validation assessments (IV&V) findings were resolved
timely by DHS and the MD THINK Executive Committee.
We recommend that DoIT ensure critical N/A DoIT ensures that IV&V findings are communicated N/A
findings from IV&V project assessment and continuously reviews IV&V results and
reports for MD THINK are resolved implementation of recommended actions to assess
timely, including those noted above. project changes and continuation per policy.
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 24 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Finding / Recommendation Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation Date Information14
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
Finding 7 – DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the development and implementation of eMMA resulting in
significant delays and changes to the cost and scope of the project.
We recommend that DoIT provide
significant oversight and direction over N/A DoIT has implemented actions noted in the N/A
eMMA. In particular, DoIT should responses provided for Finding 1 and Finding 2.
ensure Additionally, regular, standing meetings between
a. eMMA is completed in DoIT and DGS Executive leadership are held to
accordance with the most ensure transparency, open communication, and to
recently approved schedule and determine best next steps.
budget;
b. issues identified by the monthly
health assessments and the
IV&Vs are resolved, including
developing an overall project
schedule with defined tasks and
a standardized method of
tracking percentage of
completion is used; and
c. based on its own IT project
expertise, proactively identify
other actions intended to
encourage vendor resolution of
the current eMMA issues and
ensure DGS complies with the
terms of its contract.
networkMaryland
Finding 8 (policy Issue) – DoIT used the networkMaryland contract to award significant work unrelated to networkMaryland
without considering a competitive procurement process.
We recommend that DoIT
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 25 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Finding / Recommendation Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation Date Information14
a. modify the networkMaryland contract N/A DoIT disagreed with this recommendation. The N/A
to clearly define the scope and extent Network Managed Services contract
of all services provided; (“networkMaryland”) clearly defines the scope and
extent of all services provided. None of the work
orders issued off the contract were considered out of
scope. This has been evaluated by DoIT’s AAG.
b. obtain retroactive approval from BPW N/A DoIT disagreed with this recommendation. N/A
for the current staff augmentation and Retroactive approval from BPW for the current staff
cybersecurity remediation work augmentation and cybersecurity remediation work
orders; and orders issued off of the NMS contract is not required
by law or BPW regulations, as none of the work
orders issued off the contract were considered out of
scope. Furthermore, when the ceiling modification
for the NMS contract was submitted and approved
by the BPW in June 2023, the justification for the
ceiling increase included the cyber remediation and
MDH cyber incident response
c. or any additional work and in the In Progress To maximize competition and ensure the State 10/31/2024
spirit of its counsel’s legal advice, receives the most advantageous contract terms, an
solicit secondary competition assessment was done of all work orders issued
amongst approved CATS+ under the networkMaryland contract to determine
contractors for staff augmentation if the work order services should be procured as a
and cybersecurity remediation separate, stand alone contract or if there was an
services to maximize competition existing statewide contract that appeared to be a
and help ensure it receives the most better fit for the services being provided for under
advantageous contract terms. the work order. A plan was established to
transition each work order identified, effective July
1, 2024, to either a new stand alone contract or
under a different statewide contract. All new work
orders requested under the networkMaryland
contract are evaluated using this criteria to
determine the best solution for the State in
procuring services needed. Additionally, all work
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 26 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Finding / Recommendation Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation Date Information14
orders issued under the networkMaryland contract
will be reviewed and reevaluated to ensure they are
within scope and that it is in the State’s best
interest to continue services under the
networkMaryland contract.
The Request for Proposal (RFP) for both
cybersecurity assessments and remediation activities
is currently in evaluation. Anticipated award is
October 2024.
Finding 9 – DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for agency staff augmentation services under the
networkMaryland contract and documentation of certain work orders could not be provided.
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure labor hours billed for staff Complete Effective July 1, 2023, DoIT implemented a new Completed
augmentation work orders for other procedure. While work orders issued under the
State agencies are accurate prior to networkMaryland contract still require appropriate
approving invoices for payment, DoIT approval, agencies receiving the services will
issue the related purchase orders (referencing the
prime contract). Thus, all invoices related to work
orders for other State agencies are now reviewed,
approved and processed by the respective agencies.
Since they are directly receiving services, it is their
responsibility to ensure labor hours billed for staff
augmentation are accurate prior to approving
invoices for payment.
b. ensure approved work order Complete DoIT has put a dedicated contract manager in place Completed
documentation is maintained, and for the networkMaryland contract, who put
procedures in place July 2024 to ensure that
approved work order documentation is maintained.
Work Orders are requested through the DoIT Intake
process. A weekly meeting with DoIT legal and
appropriate contract managers is held to discuss
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 27 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Finding / Recommendation Current Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address the Completion Primary Contact
Status Recommendation Date Information14
approval of such requests. Items discussed and
action taken (i.e., approvals) are documented for
each meeting
c. ensure subcontractors are approved In Progress DoIT has put a dedicated contract manager in place 09/30/24
and qualified. for this contract, who is finalizing procedures to
ensure that all subcontractors are approved and
qualified per the terms of the contract.
Finding 10 – DoIT issued work orders to the networkMaryland vendor for cybersecurity remediation services totaling
approximately $25 million that were not sufficiently detailed and did not adequately ensure that all $11.5 million invoiced by
the vendor was related to work performed on behalf of DoIT work
orders.
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure all future cybersecurity Complete All cybersecurity remediation work orders and Completed
remediation work orders and deliverables will be clearly defined under the new
deliverables are clearly defined and contract, and with estimated costs correlated to
estimated costs correlate to deliverables. The contract manager for the new
deliverables; contract will approve all work orders to verify this.
b. ensure labor hours billed are accurate Complete For all contracts, DoIT ensures that labor hours Completed
for work completed and properly billed are accurate for work completed and
supported; and properly supported. All work orders require clearly
defined specifications and deliverables, reviewed
by DoIT stakeholders, which will help to ensure
that the appropriate level of detail is provided
related to work performed by contractor staff.
c. in conjunction with legal counsel, Complete No further action is required to be taken, as DoIT is Completed
consider the recovery of funds not aware of inadequate work products received as
previously paid for inadequate work related to the work orders referenced in the auditor’s
product, to the extent analysis. All work/deliverables were
practicable. previously reviewed and approved by DoIT
Executive leadership.
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 28 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address
Finding / Recommendation Current Completion Primary Contact
the Recommendation
Status Date Information14
Information Systems Security and Control and Enterprise Services
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security and Control and Enterprise Services section, including
Findings 11 through 14 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i).
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 14
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Enterprise Technology Support Services (ETSS)
Finding 15 – DoIT did not have formal written agreements with 57 of the 130 State and local entities receiving ETSS and
did not recover $4.8 million from nine entities with agreements for services provided.
We recommend that DoIT
a. enter into formal MOUs with all In Progress DoIT has created a revised enterprise services MOU, 09/30/24
agencies for which it provides ETSS. that addresses the areas noted by the auditors, and is
The MOU should clarify DoIT and in the process of getting signatures from all 80 units
of government that have a legislative appropriation
agency responsibilities, specific
for DoIT services. To date, DoIT has signatures from
services to be provided by each, and
44 out of the 80 agreements.
a mechanism to provide for the cost
of these services (repeat); and
b. ensure amounts due from agencies are Complete DoIT Fiscal has implemented policies relating to Complete
timely recovered, including those outstanding accounts receivable to provide for
noted above. appropriate escalation of past due balances to
enforce the timely recovery of accounts receivables.
To date, DoIT has $373K in outstanding receivables
that are over 90 days past due.
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 29 ---
APPENDIX A
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) – Report Dated March 29, 2024
Status as of August 15, 2024
Estimated
Actions Taken / To Be Taken to Address
Finding / Recommendation Current Completion Primary Contact
the Recommendation
Status Date Information14
Equipment
Finding 16 – DoIT did not adequately control its equipment inventory and did not maintain accurate detail records.
We recommend that DoIT comply with
the requirements of the DGS Inventory
Control Manual by
a. conducting annual independent In Progress DoIT is in the process of conducting a physical 06/30/25
physical inventories (repeat), and inventory, as well as working with DGS to update
the existing Inventory Control Manual to allow for
automated processes for the inventory of IT
equipment.
b. ensuring property is properly In Progress DoIT has investigated the differences noted by the 09/30/24
reported to DGS on the annual report auditors, reconciled financial records to the
of fixed assets and investigating the equipment records, and prepared corrected Annual
Reports for 2021, 2022 and 2023. These corrected
aforementioned difference and
Annual Reports will submit to DGS with the 2024
submitting a corrected annual report
Annual Report.
to DGS.
14 Auditor’s Comment – Contact Information has been removed.

--- Page 30 ---
APPENDIX B
March 21, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) has received the draft report on the Follow-up
Review of DoIT to address the findings in the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) March 29, 2024
audit report.
DoIT acknowledges the efforts of the legislative auditors during this audit; however, there are
many factual inaccuracies in the draft report that we hope are addressed prior to OLA finalizing
the report. Responses to OLA’s review of the audit findings are attached to this cover letter.
Sincerely,
Melissa S. Leaman
Acting Secretary
Department of Information Technology
Auditor’s Comment:
DoIT states that there are many factual inaccuracies in OLA’s report. We reviewed DoIT’s
responses and stand by the facts presented which were factually accurate based upon
documentation DoIT was able to provide during our fieldwork.

--- Page 31 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Major Information Technology Development Projects (MITDPs)
Prior Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) should assume greater
oversight responsibility to ensure that MITDPs were completed on time and
on budget.
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommended that DoIT take the necessary steps to establish adequate
safeguards to ensure the successful implementation of MITDPs, especially when
delegating key aspects of MITDP oversight. For example, DoIT should verify
that State agencies have appropriate qualified personnel with sufficient technical
knowledge, assist with MITDP contract procurements and subsequent contract
modifications, and periodically review MITDP expenditures for compliance with
contract terms.
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Agree
Please provide additional DoIT concurs that remediation of this finding is in progress.
comments as deemed
necessary. We concur with the OLA assessment that DoIT is not assessing
the qualifications of agency staff assigned to MITDPs and that
oversight staff is not habitually included in the review of IT
contracts for their MITDPs, both of which we are in the process of
correcting.
We do not concur with OLA’s assessment that MITDP
expenditures are not reviewed for compliance with contract terms;
all invoices charged to the ITIF are reviewed by oversight staff to
ensure they are legitimate project expenses (i.e., related to a valid
contract related to the project, are for legitimate MITDP
expenses).
Page 1 of 14

--- Page 32 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 2
DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they were on budget and
on schedule and that changes to the scope and cost of the project were
appropriate.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure annual Information Technology Project Requests (ITPRs) are
submitted by State agencies, and that DoIT reviews and approves them prior
to submitting it to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the
Department of Legislative Services for budget analysis purposes (repeat);
b. review the methodology and basis for estimated costs and schedules on ITPRs
to ensure these estimates appear reasonable and are supported;
c. obtain and review explanations for significant changes, such as increases in
project costs;
d. require the oversight project managers (OPMs) to ensure monthly health
assessments are provided by State agencies, verify the accuracy of
information reported, and provide justifications for the risk ratings (repeat);
and
e. review and approve changes in scope, cost, and schedule, as required by its
policy.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Disagree
Please provide additional DoIT does not concur with the OLA assessment of this finding.
comments as deemed We have corrected the issues identified in this finding.
necessary.
a: We concur with OLA’s assessment that this finding has been
remediated.
b: OLA asserts that “DoIT did not review three projects, with
estimated project costs totaling $67 million, for the methodology
and basis for estimated costs and schedules to ensure these
estimates appeared reasonable and are supported.” This is
factually incorrect as the oversight team did review these
Page 2 of 14

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
estimates, but that review was not clearly documented, a
deficiency we are correcting.
c: OLA asserts that DoIT “did not obtain and review explanations
for the significant increases” in FMIS and eMMA from FY25 to
FY26. This is factually incorrect as the oversight team did review
these increases, but that review was not clearly documented. This
is due to the projects rebaselining through the annual ITPR, which
will no longer be allowed as of the launch of our new ITPR tool
for FY27. All future rebaselines will follow the standard
rebaseline process and all changes will be thoroughly
documented.
d: OLA correctly states that the DoIT documentation for
evaluating monthly health assessments does not include
instructions for escalating concerns if the assessments are not
completed or accurate, but incorrectly assumes that that means we
do not address such concerns. That is factually incorrect; DoIT
takes regular action to follow up on missing monthly health
assessments and any other issues. The specific example given in
OLA’s report was resolved in January 2025 as a result of actions
taken by the oversight team and DoIT.
e: OLA uses the same example as item c to assert that DoIT does
not review and approve changes in scope, cost, and schedule. As
stated above, this is incorrect, although in the cases cited, this
review was not clearly documented.
Page 3 of 14

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 3
DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate OPMs hired through
vendors to oversee MITDPs.
Prior Report Recommendation 3
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure performance evaluations adequately demonstrate that OPMs were
satisfactorily performing their job duties (such as including specific comments
that justify the ratings) and meeting expectations;
b. develop written definitions and criteria, similar to DBM Performance
Planning and Evaluation Program Guidelines noted above, that define each
performance area and rating category to ensure evaluations are an effective
tool to monitor the OPMs in an observable, measurable, and objective
manner; and
c. retain the performance evaluations and take corrective action when OPMs
performance is unsatisfactory.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Disagree
Please provide additional DoIT does not concur with the OLA assessment of this finding.
comments as deemed We have corrected the issues identified in this finding.
necessary.
OLA assessed that of the reviewed performance evaluations for
oversight staff, none had comments by the DoIT supervisor to
justify the rating given. However, comments are optional in the
form (and were stated as optional in the findings documented by
OLA) and the supervisor’s rating serves as the assessment of staff.
Please note, the performance evaluation forms were revised to be
consistent with the forms used as part of the State’s Performance
Evaluation Program. The instructions for completing those forms
do not require comments to justify ratings for satisfactory
performance.
Page 4 of 14

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 4
DoIT could not support cost data and conclusions included in its annual
report submitted to the Governor, DBM, and General Assembly; and did not
always include changes in schedule, cost, and other identified problems with
MITDPs, as required by State law.
Prior Report Recommendation 4
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure that its annual reports include accurate estimated costs to complete
(repeat) and retain documentation to support the amounts reported; and
b. accurately report known or anticipated changes in schedule, cost, and scope
and provide a summary of problems identified by an external review, as
required by State law.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Disagree
Please provide additional DoIT does not concur with the OLA assessment of this finding.
comments as deemed We have corrected the issues identified in this finding.
necessary.
a: OLA asserts that “DoIT was unable to provide documentation
to support the estimated costs to complete reported in its annual
report for two projects totaling $341.3 million.” However, our
practice is to ensure the agency has supporting documentation
without storing it ourselves.
b: OLA asserts that DoIT “did not always provide a summary of
problems identified by an external review” in annual reports. Our
annual reports are necessarily summaries, and we highlight the
highest priority and / or highest impact items facing each project,
regardless of the source (external review or otherwise).
Page 5 of 14

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
MD THINK
Prior Finding 5
DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the increase in MD THINK
costs from the initial $166.4 million to $588.8 million and delays in the system
implementation, which as of November 2023 was estimated to be
approximately three years behind the initial project completion date.
Prior Report Recommendation 5
We recommended that DoIT, in accordance with State law, and in conjunction
with the MD THINK Executive Committee,
a. monitor the project to ensure that costs, functionality, and delivery dates are
consistent with the terms of the contracts or adequately justified if significant
variances are necessary; and
b. ensure the project is fully implemented or take immediate corrective actions.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Disagree
Please provide additional DoIT does not concur with OLA’s assertion that the success or
comments as deemed failure of the MD THINK platform is the responsibility of DoIT.
necessary. At the time in question MD THINK was operated by the
Department of Human Services, which is accountable for its
performance.
Apart from the above, OLA makes several assertions in the report
that we do not agree with. OLA asserts that “DoIT could not
provide an explanation for the increase in MD THINK costs
[since FY22]”. This is not accurate; explanation for the increase in
costs is captured in the Advanced Planning Documents DHS
submitted to their federal partners, which DoIT encouraged OLA
to request.
OLA further asserts that DoIT “did not provide an explanation for
why the completion date for the project was not consistent with
the terms of the contracts” and that DoIT should not have
approved additional funding for DHS’s applications (CJAMS,
Page 6 of 14

--- Page 37 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
CSMS, and E&E) while assessing whether those applications are
post-MVP and should be graduated from the MITDP program.
Both of these conclusions represent a misunderstanding of
technical system implementation: it is not only acceptable but
expected that development of technical systems will continue
beyond the period funded by the MITDP program, which only
covers early system development. In this particular case, it is
expected that contracts may outlast the MITDP time period and
that the State will continue to invest in development of systems
over time as program requirements and technologies change.
Page 7 of 14

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 6
DoIT did not ensure that IV&V findings were resolved timely by DHS and
the MD THINK Executive Committee.
Prior Report Recommendation 6
We recommended that DoIT ensure critical findings from IV&V project
assessment reports for MD THINK are resolved timely, including those noted
above.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Disagree
Please provide additional DoIT does not concur with OLA’s assertion that the success or
comments as deemed failure of the MD THINK platform is the responsibility of DoIT.
necessary. At the time in question MD THINK was operated by the
Department of Human Services, which is accountable for its
performance.
In projects with IV&V, DoIT ensures that IV&V contractors are
in place and that IV&V reports are being reviewed by project
leadership. We do not determine the priorities of the project team
in addressing known issues.
Page 8 of 14

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)
Prior Finding 7
DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the development and
implementation of eMMA resulting in significant delays and changes to the
cost and scope of the project.
Prior Report Recommendation 7
We recommended that DoIT provide significant oversight and direction over
eMMA. In particular DoIT should ensure
a. eMMA is completed in accordance with the most recently approved schedule
and budget;
b. issues identified by the monthly health assessments and the IV&Vs are
resolved, including developing an overall project schedule with defined tasks
and a standardized method of tracking percentage of completion is used; and
c. based on its own IT project expertise, proactively identify other actions
intended to encourage vendor resolution of the current eMMA issues and
ensure the Department of General Services (DGS) complies with the terms of
its contract.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Disagree
Please provide additional DoIT does not concur with OLA’s assertion that the success or
comments as deemed failure of the eMMA project is the responsibility of DoIT. eMMA
necessary. is a critical business system owned by the Department of General
Services, which is accountable for its performance. DoIT has used
its oversight authority to pause funding for eMMA while DGS
evaluated the path forward and provided experts from the
Maryland Digital Service to evaluate the current solution and
provide recommendations on how to move forward.
Page 9 of 14

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
networkMaryland
Prior Finding 8
DoIT used the networkMaryland contract to award significant work
unrelated to networkMaryland without considering a competitive
procurement process.
Prior Report Recommendation 8
We recommended that DoIT
a. modify the networkMaryland contract to clearly define the scope and extent of
all services provided;
b. obtain retroactive approval from the Board of Public Works (BPW) for the
current staff augmentation and cybersecurity remediation work orders;
c. for any additional work and in the spirit of its counsel’s legal advice, solicit
secondary competition amongst approved CATS+ contractors for staff
augmentation and cybersecurity remediation services to maximize
competition and help ensure it receives the most advantageous contract terms.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Disagree (recommendations a and b)
Please provide additional Recommendation a: Since DoIT’s principal counsel/Assistant
comments as deemed Attorney General (AAG) had advised that none of the work orders
necessary. were out of scope, modifications to the scope of work were not
necessary. It is not in the State’s best interest, nor is it efficient
use of State resources, to request modifications to contracts when
a modification is not necessary. Furthermore, a separate
procurement for cybersecurity remediation services is currently in
progress, eliminating the need to use the NMS contract.
Recommendation b: As DoIT states in the audit response and the
status report, retroactive approval from BPW for prior staff
augmentation and cybersecurity remediation work orders issued
off of the NMS contract is not required by law or BPW
regulations, as none of the work orders issued off the contract
were considered out of scope per DoIT’s principal
Page 10 of 14

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
counsel/Assistant Attorney General (AAG). DoIT will not take
action that is contradictory to advice from legal counsel.
Additionally, the BPW agenda item 6/7/2023 item 72-IT (related
to a modification to the networkMaryland contract) specifically
noted the cybersecurity remediation work performed under this
contract as part of the need to increase funding for the contract.
Thus, these work orders (as part of this contract) have already
been approved by BPW.
Page 11 of 14

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 9
DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for agency staff augmentation
services under the networkMaryland contract and documentation of certain
work orders could not be provided.
Prior Report Recommendation 9
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure labor hours billed for staff augmentation work orders for other State
agencies are accurate prior to approving invoices for payment,
b. ensure approved work order documentation is maintained, and
c. ensure subcontractors are approved and qualified.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Agree
Please provide additional Since the completion of the OLA review, DoIT has completed the
comments as deemed implementation of recommendation c.
necessary.
Page 12 of 14

--- Page 43 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 10
DoIT issued work orders to the networkMaryland vendor for cybersecurity
remediation services totaling approximately $25 million that were not
sufficiently detailed and did not adequately ensure that all $11.5 million
invoiced by the vendor was related to work performed on behalf of DoIT
work orders.
Prior Report Recommendation 10
We recommended that DoIT
a. ensure all future cybersecurity remediation work orders and deliverables are
clearly defined and estimated costs correlate to deliverables;
b. ensure labor hours billed are accurate for work completed and properly
supported; and
c. in conjunction with legal counsel, consider the recovery of funds previously
paid for inadequate work product, to the extent practicable.
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
Agency Response
OLA Assessment of Status Disagree
Please provide additional At this time there are no outstanding corrective actions for DoIT
comments as deemed to implement related to Finding 10.
necessary.
Recommendations a and b, as noted by the auditors, have been
addressed with the cease of all cybersecurity related work with the
networkMaryland contractor. Additionally, DoIT is in process of
procuring a new, separate contract for cybersecurity related work.
Processes are in place, for all DoIT contracts, that ensure work
orders and deliverables are clearly defined and estimated costs
correlate to deliverables. Additionally, there are processes in
place to ensure labor hours billed are documented and reviewed
for work completed. These processes will be applied to the new
contract.
For recommendation c, OLA states in their report that DoIT did
not work with its legal counsel to consider the recovery of funds.
As stated in our original response, DoIT, in conjunction with legal
counsel, does consider recovery of funds previously paid when it
Page 13 of 14

--- Page 44 ---
Department of Information Technology
Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
is determined that a contractor has produced an inadequate work
product.
Related to the work orders performed by the networkMaryland
vendor that were noted in this audit finding, DoIT did work with
its legal counsel, and the review did not disclose inadequate work
products. Thus, there were no further actions to be taken.
Page 14 of 14

--- Page 45 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Albert S. Kim
Chau D. Mai
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Staff Auditors