Title: Board of Public Works
Date: 03/28/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67e6f7d4fc08946efd2e67e6
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:18:40.459611
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Board of Public Works
March 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 28, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Board of Public Works
(BPW) for the period beginning July 1, 2021 and ending January 15, 2025. BPW
is responsible for the review, approval, and oversight of a number of statutorily
mandated projects and programs, including significant State expenditures and
general obligation bond issuances.
Our audit did not disclose any findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
BPW.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Board of Public Works (BPW) was established by Article XII of the State
Constitution and comprises the Governor, the Comptroller of Maryland, and the
State Treasurer. BPW reviews, approves, and/or oversees a number of statutorily
mandated projects and programs, including significant State expenditures and
general obligation bond issuances. BPW maintains an administrative staff, which
is directed by the Executive Secretary. According to State records, BPW
expenditures totaled approximately $44.7 million during fiscal year 2024.
Figure 1
BPW Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 11 100.0%
Vacant 0 0.0%
Total 11
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 1,682,080 3.8%
Technical and Special Fees 8,700 0.0%
Operating Expenses 42,973,698 96.2%
Total $44,664,478
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Special Fund $41,655,676 93.3%
Federal Fund 3,008,802 6.7%
Total $44,664,478
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any deficiencies in the design or operation of BPW’s
internal controls. Our audit also did not disclose any instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to BPW. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Board of Public Works
(BPW) for the period beginning July 1, 2021 and ending January 15, 2025. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine BPW’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included grants to nonprofits, the State’s contingent fund,
judgments against the State, and compliance with reporting requirements.
Our audit did not include the BPW’s Capital Appropriation that is administered
by the Department of General Services (DGS). This activity is subject to review
during our audit of DGS – Office of the Secretary. Our audit also did not include
certain support services provided to BPW by the Comptroller of Maryland’s
Office of the Comptroller and Central Payroll Bureau. These support services
(such as payroll, processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and
related fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller and the Central Payroll Bureau.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
4

--- Page 7 ---
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2021 to January 15, 2025, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of BPW’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction or the significance of
the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card
Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing
internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were
subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data
extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
BPW’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to BPW, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
5

--- Page 8 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Dianne P. Ramirez
Senior Auditor
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Staff Auditor