Title: Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission


NOTE: Effective January 1, 2021, the authority to enforce the State’s laws concerning alcoholic beverages and tobacco products was transferred from the Comptroller of Maryland’s Field Enforcement Division to the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) [formerly the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (ATC)]. Effective May 3, 2023, ATC was renamed as ATCC.
Date: 04/01/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67ec5d9a041e5fa8920c731f
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:18:49.935473
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission
April 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 1, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Cannabis Commission (ATCC) for the period beginning January 1, 2021 and
ending June 15, 2024. ATCC is responsible for providing regulatory and
enforcement oversight of Maryland's alcohol and tobacco industries and
supporting the efforts of the Maryland Cannabis Administration to address the
unlicensed cannabis market.
Our audit disclosed that ATCC did not segregate certain collection and licensing
duties as required. Specifically, the employee who recorded collections was also
responsible for verifying they were deposited. In addition, three of the nine
employees who processed licenses also processed the related collections.
State law enacted during our audit period transferred enforcement authority over
the State’s laws concerning alcoholic beverages and tobacco products from the
Office of the Comptroller’s Field Enforcement Division to ATCC effective
January 1, 2021. Consequently, our audit also included a review to determine the
status of the finding contained in our Comptroller of Maryland – Field
Enforcement Division audit report dated September 7, 2021. We determined that
ATCC satisfactorily addressed this finding.

--- Page 4 ---
ATCC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our finding and recommendations, and have concluded
that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
ATCC.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) is responsible for
providing regulatory and enforcement oversight of Maryland's alcohol and
tobacco industries while supporting the efforts of the Maryland Cannabis
Administration by addressing the unlicensed cannabis market. Specifically, the
ATCC issues licenses and permits related to the manufacture, sale (excluding
retail),1 transportation, storage, and importation of alcohol, tobacco, and
electronic smoking device products. ATCC also ensures that those involved in
the alcohol, tobacco, electronic smoking device, and cannabis industries in
Maryland act in accordance with local, State, and federal laws by conducting
routine inspections and criminal investigations.
According to the State’s records, ATCC’s expenditures totaled approximately
$9.8 million during fiscal year 2024 (see Figure 1 on the following page).
According to agency records, as of June 30, 2024, there were 1,063 alcohol
licenses, 6,036 alcohol permits, and 284 tobacco and electronic smoking device
licenses. Additionally, there were 8,496 local alcohol retailers and 6,247 local
tobacco retailers located in Maryland.
1 Local liquor boards license alcohol retailers and the Clerks of Circuit Courts license tobacco and
electronic smoking device retailers in their respective jurisdictions.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
ATCC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 55 91.7%
Vacant 5 8.3%
Total 60
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $6,399,086 65.6%
Technical and Special Fees 29,471 0.3%
Operating Expenses 3,324,071 34.1%
Total $9,752,628
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $7,527,228 77.2%
Reimbursable Fund 2,225,400 22.8%
Total $9,752,628
Source: State financial and personnel records
Organizational and Name Changes
Prior to January 1, 2021, the Comptroller of Maryland’s (COM) Field
Enforcement Division (FED) was responsible for the enforcement of trade
practice regulations and revenue laws related to alcoholic beverages, tobacco,
motor fuel, and sales and use taxes. Additionally, FED was responsible for
monitoring and enforcing the use of business licenses and for testing motor fuel
quality. Effective January 1, 2021, Chapter 12, Laws of Maryland 20192
transferred the authority to enforce the State’s laws concerning alcoholic
beverages and tobacco products from FED to ATCC (formerly ATC).3 All other
authority and responsibilities of the former FED remain with the COM under the
newly established Field Enforcement Bureau.
2 As modified by Chapters 359 and 360, Laws of Maryland 2020.
3 Chapters 254 and 255, Laws of Maryland 2023 (Cannabis Reform Act), effective May 3, 2023
renamed the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission as the Alcohol Tobacco and Cannabis
Commission (ATCC), and required ATCC to collaborate with the Maryland Cannabis
Administration to enforce laws related to the unlicensed cannabis market.
4

--- Page 7 ---
In addition, effective July 1, 2023, the ATCC assumed certain administrative
responsibilities previously provided by the COM including procurement,
processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, human resources,
related fiscal functions (such as processing deposits), and payroll processing.
Accordingly, our current audit included these activities since July 1, 2023 and the
activity prior to that date will be included in our audit of the COM.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding (and final) Comptroller of Maryland – Field Enforcement Division
audit report dated September 7, 2021. We determined that ATCC satisfactorily
addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) did not properly
segregate collection and licensing duties as required.
Analysis
ATCC did not properly segregate collection and licensing duties as required. As
noted above, responsibility for processing collections transferred from the
Comptroller of Maryland to ATCC effective July 1, 2023. According to State
accounting records, ATCC collections during the period from July 1, 2023
through June 30, 2024 totaled approximately $3.3 million, which primarily related
to checks and money orders for licensing and permit fees and fines.
Our review of procedures subsequent to the transfer of collection processing to
ATCC disclosed that the employee who recorded collections upon receipt was
also responsible for verifying they were deposited. In addition, three of the nine
employees who could independently issue or renew licenses also processed the
related collections. As a result, there is a risk that collections could be
misappropriated by these employees without being readily detected. ATCC
management advised that this condition was caused by limited staffing.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual
requires that an employee independent of cash receipt functions verify initial
5

--- Page 8 ---
records of collections to amounts deposited and separation of cash handling duties
and licensing duties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ATCC properly segregate collection and licensing
functions. Specifically, we recommend that
a. an employee independent of the collection function verify all collections
are deposited, and
b. employees who process licenses not have access to the related collections.
We advised ATCC how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Cannabis Commission (ATCC) for the period beginning January 1, 2021 and
ending June 15, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ATCC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, payroll, licenses, and inspections.
State law enacted during our audit period transferred enforcement authority over
the State’s laws concerning alcoholic beverages and tobacco products from the
Comptroller of Maryland’s Field Enforcement Division to ATCC effective
January 1, 2021. Consequently, our audit also included a review to determine the
status of the finding contained in our Comptroller of Maryland - Field
Enforcement Division audit report dated September 7, 2021.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
ATCC by the Office of the Comptroller prior to July 1, 2023. These support
6

--- Page 9 ---
services (such as procurement, processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting
records, human resources, related fiscal functions, and payroll processing) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Comptroller of Maryland - Office of
the Comptroller.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 1, 2021 to June 15, 2024, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of ATCC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from ATCC’s internal licensing systems for the purpose of
testing licensing transactions. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
ATCC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
7

--- Page 10 ---
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to ATCC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding related to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ATCC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to ATCC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
ATCC’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise ATCC regarding the results of
our review of their responses.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
March 28, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft legislative audit report on the Maryland
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission.
If you have any questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate to contact
Andrew J. Waters directly at 410-260-6245 or email at andrew.waters@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Jeffery A. Kelly
Executive Director
cc: Jeffrey H. Herndon, Director – Field Enforcement Division
Thomas R. Akras, Esquire, Director – Legal & Legislative Division
Andrew J. Waters, Director – Regulatory, Licensing, and Administrative
Services Division

--- Page 12 ---
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) did not properly
segregate collection and licensing duties as required.
We recommend that ATCC properly segregate collection and licensing
functions. Specifically, we recommend that
a. an employee independent of the collection function verify all collections
are deposited, and
b. employees who process licenses not have access to the related collections.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Due to the death of our Licensing Supervisor in combination with
additional comments as limited staffing, the ATCC was required to enlist and cross train
deemed necessary. employees in multiple duties for a brief interval to maintain the critical
functions of the agency.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2024
Please provide details of The ATCC has since established an employee independent of the cash
corrective action or receipt function to verify and reconcile all collections as of August 2024.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2024
Please provide details of All three licensing personnel positions have since been filled and are
corrective action or strictly fulfilling licensing duties as of October 2024.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
John B. Wachter, CFE
Senior Auditor
Nicole D. Bishop
Mia W. Foelster
Staff Auditors