Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2024 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/08/2025
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67f5827c375e823497911f44
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:20:05.167796
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 8, 2025
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) to resolve the 8
repeat audit findings (that were addressed by 11 recommendations) in our November 2, 2023
audit report. This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement specified in the April
2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page 124. The JCR required that, prior to the release of
$100,000 of its administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2025, MCPA must take corrective
action on all repeat audit findings on or before November 1, 2024.
The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget committees
listing each repeat audit finding along with a determination that each repeat finding was
corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget
committees to review and release the funds prior to the end of the fiscal year. Certain detailed
information and exhibits have been deemed cybersecurity related and therefore have been
redacted in accordance with the State Government Article Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
In accordance with the April 2024 JCR requirement, MDH on behalf of MCPA provided
a status report to OLA, dated November 1, 2024, detailing certain corrective actions that had
been completed and actions that were ongoing with respect to all eight repeat audit findings
(Exhibit 1). The MCPA status report indicated, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, that
corrective actions had been completed for all the recommendations in findings 4 and 5. For
findings 1, 2, 6, and 7, the MCPA status report indicated they had implemented certain elements
of these recommendations, but the actions to date did not address the entirety of the findings.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 8, 2025
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
We reviewed the implementation status for the two non-cybersecurity-related findings
that MDH reported as complete on the status report. Specifically, we reviewed the related
documentation, performed limited tests and analyses of the information, and held discussions
with MCPA personnel as necessary to assess the implementation status of the related
recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards.
As summarized in Exhibit 2, our review determined that for the two non-cybersecurity-
related findings, MCPA had not yet taken sufficient actions to implement the recommendations
for findings 4 and 5. Although MCPA had implemented certain elements of these
recommendations, the actions to date did not address the entirety of the findings as further
described in Exhibit 3.
After discussing our review results, MCPA generally agreed with the accuracy of the
information presented. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the
review by MCPA We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please
contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Acting Secretary Ryan B. Moran, Dr.P.H., MDH
Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Tricia C. Roddy, Deputy Medicaid Director, MDH
Perrie T. Briskin, Chief of Staff, Health Care Financing, MCPA
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Joan M. Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget and
Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Anne W. Braun, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Third-Party Liability
Finding 1
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not ensure that all referrals of
potential third-party health insurance information were investigated and recorded in the
Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II), which could result in MCPA
improperly paying claims that should have been paid by a third party.
Recommendation 1b
We recommend that MCPA ensure that all MCO insurance referrals are recorded into
MMIS II timely (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 1b
Status as of In Progress Completion Date:
12/31/24
11/1/2024
While working to automate this process as outlined above, MCPA
continues to enter data manually and increase staffing support to
Please provide
address backlogs of data entry. All 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023
details of corrective
files through September 2023 that were associated with the audit
action taken.
finding have been updated. MCPA continues to recruit for vacant
positions to support manual entry.
Review of Questionable Activity
Finding 2
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover questionable
Medicaid payments, including $7.1 million in payments on behalf of incarcerated and
deceased recipients.
Recommendation 2b
We recommend that MCPA establish effective processes over questionable Medicaid
payments. Specifically, MCPA should sufficiently document its reviews of investigations of
questionable recipient eligibility (including instances of recipients missing SSNs or
receiving Medicaid benefits in other states) to support that proper corrective action was
taken (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2b
Status as of In Progress Completion Date: Ongoing
11/1/2024 Monitoring
7/31/2025
for

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
System
modifications
MCPA continues to conduct reviews of customers with questionable
recipient eligibility as with missing SSNs or Public Assistance
Reporting Information System (PARIS) cases in partnership with the
local departments of health and DHS. MCPA has developed the written
Please provide procedures for documenting program integrity and supervisory reviews
details of corrective of Missing SSNs and PARIS Matches and is in the process of issuing
action taken. updated guidance to local health department (LHD) and local
department of social services (LDSS) Medical Assistance staff. MCPA
is working to systematically integrate Maryland’s Surveillance and
Utilization Review Subsystem (SURS) fraud surveillance system as
part of audit procedures by mid-2025.
Program Oversight
Finding 4
MCPA had not established adequate oversight to ensure that all CFC program recipients
received personal assistance services in accordance with their plans of services.
Recommendation 4a
We recommend that MCPA establish a process to ensure that all CFC recipients are
monitored by nurses (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 4a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
Complete
11/1/2024
MCPA developed a Nurse Monitoring Agreement, which establishes
clear standards for the service, its delivery, and its continuous
Please provide monitoring by both the Local Health Departments (LHDs) providing
details of corrective nurse monitoring and MCPA. Medicaid leadership met with the Health
action taken. Officers on January 10, 2024 to review the Nursing Monitor
Agreement. Nurse Monitoring Agreements were executed with every
LHD as of May 15, 2024.

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 5
MCPA did not monitor the utilization control agent contractor to ensure continued stay
reviews of Medicaid recipients receiving services from nursing facilities were performed
timely.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPA monitor the UCA vendor to ensure CSRs are performed
timely and assess liquidated damages as permitted by the contract (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 5
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
Complete
11/1/2024
MCPA begins operations with a new UCA contract starting 9/3/2024.
Please provide
With the new contract, protocols will be in place to ensure CSRs are
details of corrective
performed timely. MCPA will continue to assess liquidated damages as
action taken.
permitted by the contract.
Finding 6
MCPA did not have an established process to ensure costly recipient ventilator care claims
submitted by nursing facilities were valid, as required by State regulations.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MCPA establish procedures to periodically validate ventilator care
claims submitted by nursing facilities, as required by State regulations, and recoup any
claim payments that are determined to be unsupported or improper (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6
Status as of In Progress Completion Date:
4/1/25
11/1/2024
MCPA began operations with a new UCA contract starting 9/3/2024.
Please provide The UCA will take on the task of completing ventilator care
details of corrective validations using a process developed in collaboration with MCPA.
action taken. The UCA will complete any outstanding validations from MCPA’s
current list and, after completing them, move to the next year.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 7
MCPA did not conduct the required audits of Medical Day Care (MDC) and Supports
Planning providers, and the related audit policy and procedures were not sufficiently
comprehensive.
Recommendation 7a
We recommend that MCPA audit MDC providers (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7a
Status as of In Progress Completion Date:
12/31/24
11/1/2024
Annual Supports Planning Agency audits commenced in February
2024 and are on pace to be completed by the end of calendar year 2024
Please provide in alignment with MCPA’s policy.
details of corrective
action taken. MCPA developed an MDC audit schedule in alignment with its policy.
MDC audits are ongoing utilizing the revised standard operating
procedure recommended by the OLA auditors.
Recommendation 7b
We recommend that MCPA ensure that all MDC provider claims since the previous audit
are subject to testing (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7b
Status as of In Progress Completion Date:
12/31/24
11/1/2024
The MDC program has updated its auditing tool to require all auditing
staff document the time period of the previous attendance audit and
resume attendance auditing from that period to ensure no time periods
Please provide are skipped or missed while auditing each provider. The standard
details of corrective operating procedure (SOP) was also updated. The MDC team has
action taken. received updated training and will continue to engage in monthly audit
meetings to ensure competency and employ standardization among
staff, reinforce best practices, discuss findings, auditing progress, and
technical assistance.
Recommendation 7c
We recommend that MCPA enhance its MDC audit policy to establish audit scope
requirements and testing methodology, including a requirement to expand audit testing
when significant deficiencies are identified (repeat).

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Recommendation 7c
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
Complete
11/1/2024
The MDC program established a SOP that directs an expansion of
audits based on specific deficiencies. Findings, risk controls, mitigation
Please provide strategies, and best practices are discussed with MDC providers at the
details of corrective conclusion of the audit. MDC providers must provide a corrective
action taken. action plan (CAP) to MCPA when deficiencies are discovered. The
CAP must outline the remediation the MDC provider will take to
ensure compliance.
Information Systems Security and Control
Confidentiality Notice – The Information Systems Security and Control section, including
Findings 9 and 10, has been deemed to contain cybersecurity-related information and audit
findings and was redacted from the publicly available report and correspondence.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Status of Recommendation 9a
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
11/1/2024
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Please provide
details of corrective
action taken.
Status of Recommendation 9b
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
11/1/2024
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Please provide
details of corrective
action taken.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Status of Recommendation 10
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
11/1/2024
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Please provide
details of corrective
action taken.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA)
November 2, 2023 Audit Report on the Maryland Department of Health –
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA)
MDH Status Based
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat
Reported on
Findings
Status OLA Review
Third-Party Liability
1. We recommend that MCPA ensure that
b. all Managed Care Organizations’ insurance In Progress Not Reviewed
referrals are recorded into the Medicaid
Management Information System timely.
Review of Questionable Activity
2. We recommend that MCPA establish effective
processes over questionable Medicaid payments.
Specifically, MCPA should
b. sufficiently document its reviews of
In Progress Not Reviewed
investigations of questionable recipient eligibility
(including instances of recipients missing Social
Security Numbers or receiving Medicaid benefits
in other states) to support that proper corrective
action was taken.
Program Oversight
4. We recommend that MCPA Not Resolved
Completed
a. establish a process to ensure that all Community (In Progress)
First Choice recipients are monitored by nurses.
5. We recommend that MCPA monitor the utilization
control agent vendor to ensure continued stay Not Resolved
Completed
reviews are performed timely and assess liquidated (In Progress)
damages as permitted by the contract.
6. We recommend that MCPA establish procedures to
periodically validate ventilator care claims submitted
by nursing facilities, as required by State regulations, In Progress Not Reviewed
and recoup any claim payments that are determined
to be unsupported or improper.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s November 2, 2023 Audit Report on the
Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration
(MCPA)
MDH Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat
Reported OLA Review
Findings
Status
7. We recommend that MCPA
a. audit Medical Day Care (MDC) providers. In Progress Not Reviewed
b. ensure that all MDC provider claims since
the previous audit are subject to testing. In Progress Not Reviewed
c. enhance its MDC audit policy to establish
audit scope requirements and testing
methodology, including a requirement to Completed Resolved
expand audit testing when significant
deficiencies are identified.
Information Systems Security and Control1
9.
a. Redacted cybersecurity-related Status Redacted
recommendation.
b. Redacted cybersecurity-related
recommendation.
Status Redacted
10. Redacted cybersecurity-related recommendation.
Status Redacted
1 Specific information related to cybersecurity-related findings 9 and 10 has been redacted from the publicly
available document in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 8, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Comments on Findings OLA Assessed as Unresolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 4
We recommend that Maryland Department of Health (MDH) - Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA)
a. establish a process to ensure that all Community First Choice (CFC) recipients are
monitored by nurses (repeat).
Status as Determined by MDH – Completed
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that MCPA developed, but had not yet implemented, a process to ensure
that all CFC recipients received nurse monitoring visits. MCPA management advised that the
new process would not be implemented until July 2025.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 5
We recommend that MCPA monitor the utilization control agent (UCA) vendor to ensure
continued stay reviews (CSRs) are performed timely and assess liquidated damages as
permitted by the contract (repeat).
Status as Determined by MDH – Completed
OLA Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that, as of February 2025, MCPA was still developing a procedure to
independently verify that the UCA vendor conducted CSRs timely. Accordingly, MCPA could
not readily determine whether liquidated damages should be assessed.