Title: Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Unemployment Insurance - Part 1 - Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Date: 04/08/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=67f81e85e429963208717590
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:19:46.191634
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
April 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 8, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) for the period
beginning November 16, 2020 and ending January 31, 2024. DUI administers the
State’s Unemployment Insurance Program, which includes the primary
responsibilities of collecting unemployment insurance tax contributions from
employers and processing applications for, and disbursing unemployment
benefits. We have divided our audit of DUI into two parts to address the
aforementioned DUI responsibilities. The focus of this report was unemployment
insurance tax contributions. A report on the second part of our audit will be
issued at a later date.
Our audit disclosed that DUI was not reconciling its record of all tax collections
received from employers to tax payments posted to its employer accounts
receivable records. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that amounts
posted to employer accounts were valid and complete. In addition, since
implementation of the BEACON unemployment insurance system in September
2020, DUI has been unable to generate the reports necessary to verify that tax
collections were properly deposited and recorded.
Our review also disclosed that DUI did not adequately pursue delinquent
unemployment taxes which according to its records totaled approximately $228.8
million as of March 31, 2024, most of which were over 90 days old. Similarly,
DUI did not pursue reimbursement of unemployment benefits paid on behalf of
employers exempt from paying unemployment taxes. Additionally, DUI had not

--- Page 4 ---
determined the cause and full extent of inaccurate employer accounts receivable
records.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
MDL’s response to this audit, on behalf of DUI, is included as an appendix to this
report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MDL’s
response related to the cybersecurity audit finding. We have edited MDL’s
response to remove a vendor name and other details, as allowed by our policy.
We also reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and
related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of MDL’s response
which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require
the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DUI.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Maryland Unemployment Insurance Taxes 6
Maryland Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund 7
BEACON – Unemployment Insurance Information System 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Employer Contributions
* Finding 1 – The Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) did 10
not periodically reconcile its record of all tax collections received
from employers to tax payments posted to employer accounts
receivable records to ensure amounts posted to employer accounts
were valid and complete.
* Finding 2 – DUI had not verified that unemployment tax collections 11
were properly deposited and recorded since September 2020, due to
the inability to generate certain required reports from the BEACON
system.
Delinquent Accounts
Finding 3 – DUI did not pursue liens and wage garnishments for 12
delinquent unemployment taxes due from employers.
Finding 4 – DUI did not pursue reimbursement of unemployment 13
benefits paid on behalf of employers who were exempt from paying
unemployment taxes.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 14
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Employer Accounts
Finding 6 – DUI had not determined the cause and full extent of 14
inaccurate accounts receivable records.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 19
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Labor Units as of
February 2025
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) is a separate budgetary unit
within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). DUI administers the State’s
Unemployment Insurance Program that includes the following primary
responsibilities.
 Collecting unemployment insurance tax contributions from employers
 Processing applications for, and disbursing unemployment benefits
We have divided our audit of DUI into the following two parts to address the
aforementioned DUI responsibilities. This report addresses Part 1 of our audit.
Part 1 – Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Includes employer unemployment contributions, reimbursements from
government agencies and certain non-profit organizations, associated
accounts receivable activity, and system functionality.
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits
Includes methods individuals can use to file for unemployment insurance
benefits, eligibility and monetary benefit determinations (for State
unemployment insurance), payment monitoring, prevention of fraudulent
claims, and system functionality.
According to the State’s records, DUI’s fiscal year 2023 operating expenditures
(excluding unemployment benefit disbursements) totaled approximately $110
million (see Figure 1 on the following page). During the period June 30, 2021
through June 30, 2023, DUI had vacancy rates that ranged from 6.1 percent to
14.9 percent. As of June 30, 2023, approximately 14.9 percent of the total 377
positions were vacant.1
1 While we were advised that the 14.9% vacancy rate was primarily for staff that conduct claim
related functions which were augmented by contractual service staffing; these vacancies may
have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
MDL – DUI Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 321 85.1%
Vacant 56 14.9%
Total 377
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 37,097,558 33.7%
Technical and Special Fees 1,775,054 1.6%
Operating Expenses 71,095,828 64.7%
Total $109,968,440
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Special Fund $ 2,762,451 2.5%
Federal Fund 107,205,989 97.5%
Total $109,968,440
Source: State financial and personnel records
Maryland Unemployment Insurance Taxes
Maryland employers are required to remit Maryland unemployment insurance
taxes based on a percentage of wages paid to their employees. During calendar
year 2023, the employer tax rate ranged from 1 percent to 10.5 percent of the first
$8,500 of employee wages, and for calendar year 2024, the percentage ranged
between 0.3 percent and 7.5 percent. The tax rates are established by State law
based on an annual calculation and estimate of the funds necessary to meet federal
requirements regarding the necessary minimum balance to be maintained in the
Maryland Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund.
The particular tax rate paid by an employer is impacted by various factors, most
notably the amount of unemployment benefits paid by DUI and charged to the
employer’s account during a specified period for eligible employee layoffs and
terminations. Certain entities, such as nonprofit organizations and governmental
entities, are exempt from these taxes and, instead, reimburse the State for any
6

--- Page 9 ---
unemployment benefits paid by the State on their behalf. As of July 2024, an
unemployed individual could receive a maximum of $430 per week for 26 weeks
of State benefits in one benefit year.
According to DUI records, during fiscal year 2023, DUI collected approximately
$596.2 million from employers ($570.1 million in unemployment insurance taxes
and $26.1 million in benefit reimbursements) and received $56.8 million in
federal funding relating primarily to the COVID-19 pandemic (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
Summary of DUI Financial Activity
Fiscal Years 2019 - 2023
($ in billions)
Employers Receipts Other Receipts
Disbursements Trust Fund Balance
$10.0
$8.0
$6.0
$4.0
$2.0
$1.4 $1.7
$2.0 $0.7
$0.4
$0.0
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Source: DUI Records and Fiscal Year 2019-2023 Trust Fund Financial Statements
Maryland Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund
DUI maintains the Maryland Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) for the
deposit of unemployment taxes collected from employers and the payment of
benefits to the unemployed. The UITF is required by federal regulation to retain a
7

--- Page 10 ---
balance to cover its expected current obligations and as of June 30, 2023, the trust
fund balance was $2 billion.2
BEACON - Unemployment Insurance Information System
BEACON is DUI’s unemployment insurance information system. It was
implemented in September 2020 with total contract costs of approximately $82.4
million as of November 2024, which was primarily federal funds. Our previous
audit reports of MDL, including DUI Part 1 (issued May 2022) and DUI Part 2
(issued November 2022) contained findings regarding BEACON. MDL
addressed many of these findings, but certain findings remained unresolved as
further described in findings 2 and 5 below.
On August 23, 2022, an indictment was filed in the U.S. District Court of West
Virginia against two principals of the primary BEACON contractor. The
indictment included several criminal charges such as, conspiracy to steal trade
secrets related to BEACON. On March 23, 2023, a civil lawsuit was filed against
the primary BEACON contractor by a company (the plaintiff) alleging that former
employees of the plaintiff worked for the primary BEACON contractor and used
source code and trade secrets to develop the BEACON software. We were
advised by MDL’s counsel that they believe the outcome of these cases may
seriously impact the contractor’s ability to abide by the terms and conditions of its
contract with the State.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 4, 2022. See Figure 3 for the results of
our review.
2 The COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted the balance during fiscal year 2020 and 2021
due to its unforeseen nature and the obvious exclusion of its impact from the preceding tax
calculation performed by the State. As a result of the low balance, in fiscal year 2022 DUI
received $830 million in one-time federal funds from the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021
(ARPA) State Fiscal Recovery Funds to replenish the State’s UITF.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI)
did not reconcile tax collections from employers
Repeated
Finding 1 to amounts posted to employer accounts
(Current Finding 1)
receivable records to ensure amounts posted to
employer accounts were valid and complete.
DUI had not verified that unemployment tax
collections were properly deposited and recorded
since the implementation of BEACON in Repeated
Finding 2
September 2020, due to the inability to generate (Current Finding 2)
certain required reports from the BEACON
system.
DUI did not regularly conduct data matches to
identify employers who had not registered with
Finding 3 DUI, as required by State law, and did not Not repeated
always follow up on the results of the matches
that were performed.
DUI did not ensure reimbursable employers
Finding 4 provided sufficient collateral to protect the State Not repeated
in the event claims are paid on their behalf.
DUI did not have formal policies for pursuing
collection of delinquent employer accounts, and
Finding 5 discontinued pursing delinquent accounts in Not repeated
September 2020 due to BEACON system
deficiencies.
Access to process critical employer tax related
Status Redacted3
Finding 6 transactions and functions within BEACON was
not adequately restricted.
3 Specific information of the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Employer Contributions
Finding 1
The Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) did not periodically
reconcile its record of all tax collections received from employers to tax
payments posted to employer accounts receivable records to ensure amounts
posted to employer accounts were valid and complete.
Analysis
DUI did not periodically reconcile its record of all tax collections received from
employers to tax payments posted to its employer accounts receivable records.
Specifically, our review disclosed that DUI did not reconcile electronic payments,
which accounted for 89 percent of the collections, to the related amounts posted to
employer accounts.4 Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that payment
amounts posted and credited to employer accounts were valid and complete.
We could not readily reconcile the activity due to the lack of available records
during the audit. However, we did note that DUI’s suspense account, which holds
payments not immediately identified for recording in a specific employer’s
account, increased from $4.4 million in January 2021 to $11.7 million in January
2024, which could indicate that payments are not being posted timely or properly.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, DUI responded that tax collections would be reconciled to
the employer accounts by December 31, 2022. During our current audit, we were
advised by DUI management that these actions were not implemented due to a
misunderstanding of the required records needed for the reconciliations.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual5 requires that
cash receipt totals should be periodically compared with corresponding totals of
credits to accounts receivable.
4 DUI only reconciled amounts received by check on-site and lockbox payments to the related
employer accounts, which covers approximately 11 percent of total collections.
5 The updated Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual, effective June 2024, has the same
requirements.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DUI
a. periodically, such as monthly, reconcile its tax collection records to its
employer accounts receivable records, including an investigation and
resolution of significant differences noted (repeat); and
b. ensure that all employer payments are recorded in the accounts
receivable records on a timely basis, including the amounts noted in this
finding (repeat).
Finding 2
DUI had not verified that unemployment tax collections were properly
deposited and recorded since September 2020, due to the inability to generate
certain required reports from the BEACON system.
Analysis
As of June 2024, DUI had not verified that unemployment tax collections were
properly deposited and recorded since the implementation of BEACON in
September 2020. Unemployment tax payments from employers are deposited
directly or transferred in certain cases, such as with lockbox receipts, into a bank
clearing account. Those funds are subsequently transferred from the clearing
account, as directed by DUI, into the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (the
Trust Fund) for purpose of making benefit payments.
Per DUI management BEACON is unable to generate an accurate record of
clearing account activity or ending account balances. Consequently, as of June
2024, DUI has not reconciled system records of clearing account activity to the
related bank records since the inception of BEACON in September 2020.
Periodic reconciliations between DUI’s clearing account records and the
corresponding bank records are needed to ensure that all collections have been
deposited and that all related transactions, including the transfer of funds to the
Trust Fund, are properly recorded. During fiscal year 2023, DUI reported
collections deposited into the clearing account totaled $573.8 million.
A similar condition was noted in our preceding audit report. In response to that
report, DUI stated it would work with its vendor to develop an automated
reconciliation process and would conduct monthly reconciliations by December
2022. DUI was unable to explain why it has been unable to develop the
reconciliations.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DUI
a. correct the system deficiencies in BEACON that are preventing accurate
compiling and reporting of clearing account activity (repeat); and
b. periodically, such as monthly, reconcile its clearing account activity and
balance per BEACON to the corresponding account data reported by the
bank, including an investigation and resolution of any significant
differences noted (repeat).
Delinquent Accounts
Finding 3
DUI did not pursue liens and wage garnishments for delinquent
unemployment taxes due from employers.
Analysis
DUI did not pursue liens and wage garnishments for delinquent unemployment
taxes due from employers. According to DUI records, these employers had
delinquent unemployment taxes totaling approximately $228.8 million as of
March 31, 2024, most of which were over 90 days old. State laws provide several
collection tools for DUI to pursue delinquent taxes including sending two
delinquency notices, liens, garnishments, US Treasury and State intercepts,
business charter forfeiture, and Motor Vehicle Administration license and
registration flagging. DUI suspended all these collection tools due to the COVID-
19 State of Emergency (March 2020 to July 2021).
Our review disclosed that as of March 2024 (32 months after the State of
Emergency ended), DUI had not reinstated liens or garnishments as allowed by
State law. DUI’s policy includes a requirement to pursue liens and garnishments
for delinquent accounts in excess of $2,000, which according to DUI’s records
totaled $22.5 million between 91 to 450 days as of March 31, 2024.6
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DUI resume liens and garnishments of delinquent
accounts, including those noted above.
6 There were also employer accounts with delinquent balances over $2,000 aged greater than 450
days totaling $170.9 million. However, due to DUI’s records we were unable to readily
determine the actual age of the account or if a lien had been filed for the delinquent balance.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 4
DUI did not pursue reimbursement of unemployment benefits paid on behalf
of employers who were exempt from paying unemployment taxes.
Analysis
DUI did not pursue amounts due from certain employers exempt from
unemployment taxes. State law provides that certain employers (for example,
governmental units) are exempt from unemployment taxes and instead reimburse
the State for any unemployment benefits paid on their behalf. Per DUI records, as
of March 2024, there were 1,069 of these reimbursable employers with balances
totaling $56.3 million that were delinquent for 31 days or more,7 including 814
employers with balances totaling $37.3 million that were more than 450 days old.
Our review disclosed that during our audit period (November 16, 2020 to January
31, 2024), DUI did not send delinquency notices to reimbursable employers. In
addition, although reimbursable employers provided DUI with collateral as
security for any claims, DUI did not use the collateral to satisfy any delinquent
debts. We could not readily determine the number of delinquent accounts that
would have been eligible for such actions. DUI management advised us that the
failure to send the dunning notices were the result of problems with BEACON.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DUI
a. perform all available collection efforts for reimbursable employers,
including sending delinquency notices and, when necessary, using
collateral to satisfy the debts; and
b. correct any BEACON issues needed to implement collection efforts.
7 As of February 2024, there were a total of 2,034 reimbursable employers.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with MDL’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Employer Accounts
Finding 6
DUI had not determined the cause and full extent of inaccurate employer
accounts receivable records.
Analysis
DUI had not determined the cause and full extent of inaccurate employer accounts
receivable records. We were advised by DUI management that in 2023, it noted
that certain accounts receivable records were inaccurate and that its review
disclosed 1,426 accounts with credit balances overstated by $20.6 million because
of duplicated transactions being posted to these accounts. Accounts with a credit
balance may result in a refund being issued to the employer. DUI management
advised that it believed the incorrect accounts were isolated to the aforementioned
duplicated transactions and in February 2024, DUI corrected its records to
eliminate the overstatements.
DUI management could not document the aforementioned review and therefore
we could not determine if it was sufficiently comprehensive. In this regard, our
test of four accounts receivable records with credit balances totaling
approximately $2.5 million8 as of September 2023, disclosed that two accounts
were still overstated by $284,000 as of March 2024. DUI could not explain the
cause of these two overstatements and whether there were other inaccurate
records.
8 We selected these accounts receivable records with credit balances for testing based on
materiality.
14

--- Page 17 ---
In addition, DUI could not document whether it identified and recovered any
refunds resulting from the improper account balances. In this regard, we selected
five material refunds totaling approximately $327,800 from employers on a DUI
provided list of 52 employer accounts with potential incorrect credit balances.
Our test disclosed that one refund totaling $16,100 was overpaid by $12,400,
prior to the aforementioned February 2024 revision by DUI. We were advised
that DUI had not recovered this overpayment as of August 2024.
Per DUI’s records, as of March 31, 2024, there were 50,401 employers with credit
balances totaling approximately $64.6 million. The Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual9 requires the maintenance of adequate records to
account for billings and related collections.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DUI
a. conduct a documented investigation to determine the cause and full
extent of inaccurate accounts receivable records;
b. take corrective actions for any inaccurate records identified to ensure
accurate records of employer balances are maintained; and
c. recoup any improper refunds issued, including the overpayment
mentioned above.
9 The updated Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual, effective June 2024, has the same
requirements.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI), for the period
beginning November 16, 2020 and ending January 31, 2024. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DUI’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included employer unemployment contributions,
reimbursements from government agencies and certain non-profit organizations,
accounts receivable, and information systems security and control. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DUI by MDL –
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, human
resources, procurements and disbursements, maintenance of certain accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
MDL - Office of the Secretary. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of DUI’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including DUI.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 16, 2020 to January 31, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
16

--- Page 19 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DUI’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from BEACON, as well as from certain other State
records, such as those maintained by the Maryland Department of Labor, for the
purpose of testing unemployment tax payments. We performed various tests of
the relevant data and determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
DUI’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DUI, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
17

--- Page 20 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DUI’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DUI that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DUI and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from MDL, on behalf of DUI, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit
report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance
with State law. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDL regarding the results of
our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) Units
As of February 2025
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Consumer credit and oversight of financial
Office of Financial
1 institutions 09/20/24
Regulation
 Examinations and licensing
 DLI accounts receivable
 Monitoring of compliance with certain laws
Division of Labor and
2 pertaining to prevailing wages 01/06/23
Industry (DLI)
 Safety inspections for boilers, pressure vessels, and
elevators
Division of
 Benefit payments
3 Unemployment Insurance 11/15/22
 DUI System implementation
(DUI) Part II Benefits
Division of Occupational  DOPL cash receipts
4 and Professional Licensing  Licensing 3/11/22
(DOPL)  Guaranty funds
 DOR cash receipts
 Racing funds
 Distribution of video lottery terminal funds
5 Division of Racing (DOR) 01/26/22
 Certain licensee (racetrack) requirements regarding
the reporting and distribution of pari-mutuel
wagering revenue
 Information system security
 Grants
Office of the Secretary,
 Payroll
Division of
 Federal Funds
Administration,
6  Procurement and disbursements activities 01/7/22
Division of Workforce
 Support services to other divisions of MDL such as
Development and Adult
payroll, procurements and disbursements,
Learning
maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions
19

--- Page 22 ---
APPENDIX
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
100 S. Charles Street Tower 1, 9th Floor
Baltimore, MD 21201
Portia Wu, Secretary
April 7, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Enclosed is the Agency Response Form (ARF) to the draft audit report on the Maryland
Department of Labor – Division of Unemployment Insurance, Part 1 – Unemployment Insurance
Tax Contributions for the period beginning November 16, 2020 and ending January 31, 2024.
If you have any questions or concerns, please contact our office or the Maryland Division of
Unemployment Insurance.
Sincerely,
Portia Wu
Secretary of Labor
cc: Rachel Torres, Assistant Secretary
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Phone: 410-230-6020 • Facebook: MarylandLabor • Internet: labor.maryland.gov
WES MOORE, GOVERNOR | ARUNA MILLER, LT. GOVERNOR | PORTIA WU, SECRETARY

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Agency Response Form
Employer Contributions
Finding 1
The Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) did not periodically
reconcile its record of all tax collections received from employers to tax
payments posted to employer accounts receivable records to ensure amounts
posted to employer accounts were valid and complete.
We recommend that DUI
a. periodically, such as monthly, reconcile its tax collection records to its
employer accounts receivable records, including an investigation and
resolution of significant differences noted (repeat); and
b. ensure that all employer payments are recorded in the accounts
receivable records on a timely basis, including the amounts noted in this
finding (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of DUI has automated the BEACON system to reconcile employer
corrective action or accounts with the Accounts Receivable ledger since September 20, 2020.
explain disagreement. The backlog of cash reconciliation for the older, legacy Accounts
Receivable ledger has been finished up to August of 2020, and DUI is
currently investigating notable discrepancies. Our goal is to complete the
cash reconciliation for the legacy Accounts Receivable ledger by June
30, 2025. On a daily basis, we compare the ACH reports from the bank
against the BEACON system. Checks we post are then compared to
BEACON employer accounts the following day to verify Employer
accounts reflect deposits.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/25
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DUI ensured timely recording of employer payments in the accounts
corrective action or receivable records as follows:
explain disagreement.
Suspense payments from September 2020 to September 30, 2023, have
been thoroughly researched. Items that are recorded as zero payments
identified in the account from September 2020 to December 2021 are
being rectified using a PIR. This PIR fixed over 500 payments that were
posted in suspense as zero-dollar amounts, including employer
payments, agent payments, and intra-agency transfers. These payment
amounts should match the payments we received from the Bank
statements as a self-check.
Suspense payments in the pre-BEACON (legacy) system from
employers have been 100% researched and transferred, with the
exception of unidentified employer payments, which are being addressed
under another PIR (completed). This PIR itemized each of these
suspense payments in order for us to appropriately research and allocate
payments to employer accounts properly. We aim to resolve these by
June 30 2025.
DUI established a task force dedicated to working on suspense accounts
and reassigned six agency accounting staff between January and March
2023. This effort reduced the suspense from 5,897 in November 2022 to
1,000 as of January 30, 2025.
DUI assigned agency staff to collaborate directly with employers to
educate them on the correct submission of payments in BEACON. This
proactive approach has significantly reduced the number of suspense
payments.
DUI now receives sufficient data references from the bank, which
enhances the effectiveness of researching employer payments in the
suspense accounts in BEACON.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DUI had not verified that unemployment tax collections were properly
deposited and recorded since September 2020, due to the inability to generate
certain required reports from the BEACON system.
We recommend that DUI
a. correct the system deficiencies in BEACON that are preventing accurate
compiling and reporting of clearing account activity (repeat); and
b. periodically, such as monthly, reconcile its clearing account activity and
balance per BEACON to the corresponding account data reported by the
bank, including an investigation and resolution of any significant
differences noted (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The system deficiencies in BEACON that were hindering accurate
corrective action or compilation and reporting of clearing account activity have been
explain disagreement. addressed and resolved. This update was completed on October 20,
2024. BEACON has been updated and is now functioning as required for
the compilation and reporting of clearing account activity. Additionally,
Clearing Bank Account Reconciliations have been successfully
completed up to December 31, 2024 in BEACON.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The system deficiencies in BEACON that were hindering accurate
corrective action or compilation and reporting of clearing account activity have been
explain disagreement. addressed and resolved. This update was completed on October 20,
2024. BEACON has been updated and is now functioning as required for
the compilation and reporting of clearing account activity. The Cashier’s
deposit batch report is reconciled with the BEACON system the
following day. Additionally, Clearing Bank Account Reconciliations
have been successfully completed up to December 31, 2024, in both the
legacy system and BEACON.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Agency Response Form
Delinquent Accounts
Finding 3
DUI did not pursue liens and wage garnishments for delinquent
unemployment taxes due from employers.
We recommend that DUI resume liens and garnishments of delinquent
accounts, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/15/26
Please provide details of The Legal Unit has been manually initiating lien actions since January
corrective action or 30, 2025. The PIR has been approved for creation, testing, and
explain disagreement. production. Due to the vendor’s backlog, DUI expects it will take several
months for the vendor to address the PIR and for the agency to conduct
testing. This PIR will correct lien interest calculations up to the date the
lien is generated. Once completed, interest must be recalculated from the
due date of the identified debt up to and including the lien generation
date, so it can be included on the Lien Notice.
Liens will need to reflect the current balance for all quarters as of the
lien creation date. Once this PIR is in production, lien calculations will
be automated, allowing notices to be generated from BEACON instead
of being processed manually.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
DUI did not pursue reimbursement of unemployment benefits paid on behalf
of employers who were exempt from paying unemployment taxes.
We recommend that DUI
a. perform all available collection efforts for reimbursable employers,
including sending delinquency notices and, when necessary, using
collateral to satisfy the debts; and
b. correct any BEACON issues needed to implement collection efforts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of This action was completed on 4/30/2024. DUI is performing regular
corrective action or monthly review of the reimbursable employers' account collateral
explain disagreement. balances.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/15/26
Please provide details of DUI is addressing BEACON deficiencies related to collection and lien
corrective action or activities through a PIR. We will continue to actively pursue delinquent
explain disagreement. employer accounts. DUI has finalized the updated formal written
policies for the collection of delinquent employer accounts. These
policies were signed and became effective on March 1, 2023.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 5 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including
the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with MDL’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, MDL’s responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Agency Response Form
Employer Accounts
Finding 6
DUI had not determined the cause and full extent of inaccurate employer
accounts receivable records.
We recommend that DUI
a. conduct a documented investigation to determine the cause and full
extent of inaccurate accounts receivable records;
b. take corrective actions for any inaccurate records identified to ensure
accurate records of employer balances are maintained; and
c. recoup any improper refunds issued, including the overpayment
mentioned above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of MDUI conducted an investigation and uncovered issues with over 3,300
corrective action or transactions that were sitting in a suspense account without identifiable
explain disagreement. information needed to properly credit the employer, claimant, or agent.
These transactions were placed in the suspense account for further
research and reallocation. A dedicated team has been assigned to review
all incoming suspense transactions on a daily basis. In collaboration with
other agencies, such as SDAT and the Comptroller’s Office, we utilize
all available information to determine the identities of employers
attempting to make payments, ensuring that employer accounts are
credited in a timely manner.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Unemployment Insurance
Part 1
Unemployment Insurance Tax Contributions
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DUI has assigned specific individuals to investigate the inaccurate
corrective action or posting of payments. We have a shared information agreement with
explain disagreement. SDAT and the Comptroller of Maryland to identify specific employers
when that information isn’t provided along with their payment.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of DUI’s records suggest that employers may have a credit balance for
corrective action or which they would request a refund. Once the research is completed, a
explain disagreement. charge will be placed on the employer’s account, indicating a liability
due to a payment inaccuracy.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 31 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
James M. Fowler, CFE
Senior Auditor
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Jacob M. Kasten
Paul A. McGrew
Staff Auditors