Title: Maryland Department of Labor - Office of the Secretary - Division of Administration - Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Date: 04/16/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68028f2eea24cae639a7cb8e
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:20:54.351366
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
April 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 16, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Office of the Secretary, Division of Administration, and the
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning for the period beginning
October 16, 2020 and ending July 31, 2024. The Office of the Secretary and the
Division of Administration provide executive oversight, general administration,
public information, fiscal services, information technology support, and
comprehensive planning for the other MDL divisions. The Division of Workforce
Development and Adult Learning administers various employment and training
activities, including certain workforce programs that are funded primarily by the
federal government.
Our audit disclosed that MDL could not provide documentation to support
accrued federal fund revenue entries totaling $204.7 million. These entries
included at least $67.6 million which MDL was aware was not recoverable
because it had exceeded the related federal grant. Furthermore, MDL could not
document the subsequent recovery of the accrued funds. MDL also did not
submit timely requests for the reimbursement of federal fund expenditures, a
condition noted but not corrected from our preceding audit report, resulting in lost
interest income of at least $450,000.
In addition, our audit disclosed that MDL did not have adequate controls over
human resource and payroll transactions. For example, our test of ten payroll
adjustments from fiscal years 2021 through 2024 that increased employees’
payroll by approximately $56,000 disclosed that none of the test items were
independently reviewed prior to submission to the Department of Budget and
Management including 4 adjustments that could not be supported. In addition,
MDL did not ensure all timesheet discrepancies were resolved timely. For

--- Page 4 ---
example, one timesheet for the pay period ending February 21, 2023, was missing
36 hours of work time and 24 hours of unapproved time that was not resolved for
619 days, as of our test date in November 2024.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
MDL’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of MDL’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit finding. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to
our findings and related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of
MDL’s response which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that
these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDL.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Organizational Change 6
State Grants Audit 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Year-End Closeout
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) could not 9
support accrued federal fund revenue entries totaling $204.7 million,
including $67.6 million which MDL had determined was not
recoverable. In addition, MDL could not document the subsequent
recovery of the accrued funds.
Federal Funds
* Finding 2 – MDL did not submit requests for reimbursement of federal 10
fund expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest income
totaling at least $450,000.
Payroll
Finding 3 – MDL did not independently and timely approve certain 11
manually processed adjustments to employee pay and leave.
Finding 4 – MDL did not ensure all timesheet discrepancies were 13
resolved timely.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 14
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 18
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Labor Units as of February
2025
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) consists of the Office of the Secretary
and eight operating divisions. This audit report includes the operations of the
following units:
 Office of the Secretary
 Division of Administration
 Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
The Office of the Secretary and its Division of Administration provide executive
oversight, general administration, public information, fiscal services, information
technology support, and comprehensive planning for the other MDL divisions.
The Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning administers various
employment and training activities, including certain workforce programs that are
funded primarily by the federal government.
Although the remaining divisions of MDL (Unemployment Insurance, Financial
Regulation, Labor and Industry, Occupational and Professional Licensing,
Racing, and the newly created Division of Paid Leave) are included within the
scope of, and reported upon, in separate audits, the support services they receive
from the Office of the Secretary and Division of Administration are subject to
review and testing during this audit (see Exhibit 1 for a listing of OLA audits of
MDL and findings from the most recent audit report for each division).
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2024, total MDL expenditures
were approximately $602.7 million, of which $235.9 million related to the three
units audited (see Figure 1 on the following page). During the period June 30,
2021 through June 30, 2024, MDL had vacancy rates that ranged from 11.7
percent to 16.0 percent. These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to
the findings in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
MDL1 Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 675 86.0%
Vacant 110 14.0%
Total 785
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 78,954,380 33.5%
Technical and Special Fees 4,005,824 1.7%
Operating Expenses 152,914,274 64.8%
Total $235,874,478
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 55,060,466 23.3%
Special Fund 54,697,545 23.2%
Federal Fund 119,475,644 50.7%
Reimbursable Fund 6,640,823 2.8%
Total $235,874,478
Source: State financial and personnel records
Organizational Change
Chapter 48, Laws of Maryland 2022, effective January 1, 2023, established the
Family and Medical Leave Insurance (FAMLI) Program to be administered by
MDL. The program provides up to 12 weeks of benefits to covered individuals
who take leave from employment to care for certain family members, for the
individual’s own serious health condition, or for a qualifying exigency2 arising
out of a family member’s military deployment. Chapters 258 and 259, Laws of
Maryland 2023 and Chapter 266, Laws of Maryland 2024 made several
modifications to FAMLI, including delaying the program’s start date.
1 Includes the Office of the Secretary, Division of Administration, and Division of Workforce
Development and Adult Learning
2 For example, leave may be needed by a family member of a service member because the service
member has received noticed of deployment within 7 days before the deployment is to begin.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Contributions to the program will now begin on July 1, 2025, and claims for
benefits will now begin on July 1, 2026.
State Grants Audit
On November 10, 2021, we issued a performance report on State Grants to assess
the State’s policies and guidance for advertising, awarding, and monitoring State-
funded grants. The report contained two findings related to MDL.
The first finding related to State agencies, including MDL, not having
standardized grant applications and grant agreements and consequently, certain
agencies, including MDL, did not include critical provisions in grant agreements.
The recommendation for this finding was directed to the Governor’s Grants
Office (GGO) and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM). Both
GGO and DBM agreed with the finding and related recommendation. The current
status of this finding will be subject to audit in our audits of the Executive
Department and DBM and was not followed-up during our audit of MDL.
The second finding related to MDL not notifying all grantees that received
Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now grant awards of the opportunity
to receive supplemental grant funds. The recommendation was directed to MDL
and our current review determined that MDL satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the ten findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 7, 2022. See Figure 2 on the next
page for the results of our review.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MDL did not obtain documentation to support vendor
billings it paid for additional staffing at its Division of
Finding 1 Not repeated
Unemployment Insurance (DUI) and for modernizing
DUI’s unemployment insurance system.
MDL did not ensure it received technology enterprise
Finding 2 services valued at $3.8 million from the Department of Not repeated
Information Technology.
MDL did not always obtain required Board of Public
Works approval for contract modifications prior to
Finding 3 Not repeated
execution and did not publish certain contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
MDL did not always submit requests for reimbursement of
Repeated
Finding 4 federal fund expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in
(Current Finding 2)
lost interest income totaling approximately $233,400.
MDL had not established adequate controls to ensure the
Finding 5 propriety of biweekly payroll payments and leave Not repeated
balances.
MDL did not notify all grantees that received Maryland
Finding 6 Employment Advancement Right Now grant awards of Not repeated
the opportunity to receive supplemental grant funds.
MDL lacked assurance that adequate information
technology security and operational controls existed over
Finding 7 its Workforce Exchange system that was hosted, operated, Status Redacted3
and maintained by a primary service provider and two
subservice providers.
MDL lacked assurance that the underlying code for its E-
Finding 8 Status Redacted3
Licensing System web application was properly secured.
MDL did not have an information technology disaster
Finding 9 Status Redacted3
recovery plan for recovering computer operations.
MDL’s computer network had significant security
weaknesses involving the lack of periodic assessments of
Status Redacted3
Finding 10 its firewall rules, assignment of local administrative rights,
and security settings for password and account controls for
user network authentication.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i)
of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Year-End Closeout
Finding 1
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) could not support accrued
federal fund revenue entries totaling $204.7 million, including $67.6 million
which MDL had determined was not recoverable. In addition, MDL could
not document the subsequent recovery of the accrued funds.
Analysis
MDL could not provide documentation to support the propriety of its accrued
federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent recovery of funds, including at
least $67.6 million that MDL had determined was not collectable from the federal
government. At the end of fiscal year 2024, MDL recorded 21 accrued federal
revenue entries totaling $210.2 million, consisting of 18 positive accrued revenues
totaling $204.7 million and 3 negative accrued revenue entries totaling $5.5
million.
MDL Could Not Support Accrued Revenue Entries
MDL recorded 18 positive accrued revenue entries totaling $204.7 without
ensuring the amounts were related to current expenditures and collectable.
Specifically, MDL recorded accrued revenues based on the balances for each
budgetary appropriation number, which generally reflected combined activity for
multiple federal grants. This process did not ensure that the accrued revenue
entries were proper and represented amounts that were actually collectable in the
subsequent year. An evaluation of year-end account balances is critical because
of the significant amount of federal funds MDL receives each year, which may
mask unrecovered expenditures or errors in MDL’s accounting records.
MDL Could Not Support That it Received the Accrued Revenue
MDL could not readily support that accrued revenues were subsequently received.
We selected three accrued revenues4 totaling $114.3 million to determine whether
the revenue was subsequently recovered. MDL advised us that that it had
recovered some of two of these accruals, but could not specify how much was
recovered or support that the funds received were related to these accruals.
For the third accrual, MDL recorded a $71.7 million entry to eliminate a deficit
balance in one account even though MDL had determined that $67.6 million of
the amount accrued was not recoverable from the federal government because it
4 We selected these test items based on materiality.
9

--- Page 12 ---
had exceeded the available federal funding. Our review disclosed that this
amount was an accumulation of deficits dating back to fiscal year 2020. MDL
management advised that it was in consultation with the Department of Budget
and Management (DBM) to address the deficit. To the extent that the federal
funds are not available, State general funds may be needed to cover these deficits.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s year-end closing
instructions provide that these entries should reflect amounts that are collectable
within 60 days of the end of the fiscal year and that revenue should be recognized
in the same fiscal year the expenditure is made. The closing instructions also
require that detail documentation to support the entries be maintained.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDL
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported,
b. ensure the subsequent recovery of all accrued revenues, and
c. work with DBM to resolve current budgeting issues and to ensure that
future budgets are sufficient to fund routine operations.
Federal Funds
Finding 2
MDL did not submit requests for reimbursement of federal fund
expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest income totaling at
least $450,000.
Analysis
MDL did not submit timely requests for reimbursement of federal fund
expenditures related to the Unemployment Insurance and Workforce
Development grants. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2024
MDL total grant expenditures were approximately $240.2 million.
Our test of 12 federal grant reimbursements requests totaling approximately $77.9
million made during fiscal years 2023 and 20245 disclosed that the 12 requests
totaling $54.4 million were submitted one to five months late. Federal guidelines
for these grants permit expenditures to be requested on a monthly basis. Based on
our calculation, the delayed recovery of funds tested resulted in lost investment
5 We selected these test items based on materiality and timing of the drawdown.
10

--- Page 13 ---
interest income6 totaling at least $450,000. For example, the reimbursement for
December 2023 expenditures totaling $1.8 million was not requested until the end
of June 2024 resulting in lost interest income to the State totaling approximately
$32,000.
A similar condition regarding not submitting federal reimbursement requests
timely was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response to that
report MDL stated that it would adhere to federal guidelines on reimbursement
requests and it would cross-train staff to ensure that more than one staff would be
able to process the reimbursements. During our current audit, we were advised
that limited staffing prevented MDL from implementing its corrective action.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDL submit federal fund reimbursement requests as
soon as permitted under federal guidelines (repeat).
Payroll
Background
MDL’s Office of the Secretary processes payroll and leave for MDL units using
the Statewide Personnel System (SPS). Employees submit their time in SPS and
supervisors approve the time entered. Payroll adjustments (such as correcting
inaccurate payments) are initiated by the units using a manual adjustment form
and submitted to the Office of the Secretary. Similarly, leave adjustments are
processed using various manual adjustment forms, for events including
disciplinary actions and leave bank usage, and are submitted to the Office of the
Secretary for processing. According to State records, MDL’s payroll
expenditures totaled approximately $160.2 million in fiscal year 2024.
Finding 3
MDL did not independently and timely approve certain manually processed
adjustments to employee pay and leave.
Analysis
MDL did not independently and timely approve certain manually processed
adjustments to employee pay and leave. During the audit period MDL processed
494 manual payroll adjustments that changed employee pay by a total of
$358,942 (increase of $337,992 and decrease of $20,950) and 2,195 leave
6 Lost investment income refers to the amount that the State would have earned if the funds had
been invested by the State Treasurer (based on the State’s actual return on investment) instead of
being used to finance federal fund expenditures.
11

--- Page 14 ---
adjustments that changed employee leave balances by a total of 72,058 hours
(increase of 41,935 hours and decrease of 30,123 hours).
Pay Adjustments Were Not Independently Reviewed
MDL did not perform an independent review of manual payroll adjustments.
Each pay period, an MDL employee prepared a listing of payroll adjustments
using individual adjustment forms approved by the respective employees’
supervisors. The listing was then submitted to DBM for processing in SPS. Our
test of ten7 adjustments from fiscal years 2021 through 2024 that increased
employees’ pay by approximately $56,000 disclosed that none of the adjustments
were independently reviewed prior to submission to DBM. In addition, MDL did
not have supporting documentation for four of these adjustments totaling $21,800.
As a result, we could not determine the propriety of these transactions. MDL was
able to provide supporting documentation for the remaining six adjustments and
we determined the transactions were proper.
Reviews of Leave Balance Adjustments Were Not Independent and Timely
MDL’s reviews of manual leave adjustments were performed by an employee
who was not independent and the reviews were not always timely. Our test of
ten8 leave adjustments processed in fiscal years 2022 through 2025 which
increased employee leave balances by 2,923 hours disclosed that they were
performed by an employee who also had the ability to process adjustments.
Additionally, the review of eight of the ten adjustments was performed between 5
and 36 months after the adjustment was processed. Our review of these
adjustments noted that they were all properly supported.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDL
a. independently and timely verify pay and leave balance adjustments to
ensure that only authorized adjustments have been processed; and
b. investigate any unsupported pay adjustments, including those noted
above, and take appropriate corrective action.
7 We selected these test items based upon materiality and adjustment type.
8 We selected these test items based upon materiality the of employee adjustments and risk (such
as adjustment type).
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 4
MDL did not ensure all timesheet discrepancies were resolved timely.
Analysis
MDL did not ensure all timesheet discrepancies were resolved timely. To assist
in biweekly payroll processing, the State’s Statewide Personnel System (SPS)
generates several reports to help State agencies identify, investigate, and correct
timesheet errors and other discrepancies, such as employee timesheets with no
time entered, not submitted,9 or not approved. If errors and discrepancies are not
resolved by the deadline for submission to the DBM’s Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits, the payroll must still be processed but agencies must go
back and address the unresolved items.
We generated SPS discrepancy reports as of November 4, 2024, that identified
timesheets that were either not submitted by an employee or not approved by a
supervisor during fiscal years 2022, 2023, and 2024 that had not been resolved by
MDL.10 The reports identified timesheets for 246 employees with 12,192 hours
with a value of $460,000 that were unsubmitted and timesheets for 14 employees
with 854 hours of unapproved time with a value of $30,000.
We selected eleven11 of these employee timesheets for testing from fiscal years
2023 and 2024 that had a combined 880 hours valued at approximately $40,600.
Our test disclosed that as of November 1, 2024, all the timesheets tested with a
total of 788 hours valued at approximately $36,500, did not have some or all of
the time entered (444 hours), were not marked as submitted by the employee (240
hours), or were not approved (104 hours) for periods of 115 days to 619 days. For
example, one timesheet for the pay period ending February 21, 2023, was missing
36 hours of work time and 24 hours of unapproved time that was not resolved for
619 days, as of our test date in November 2024. In addition, for two of the test
items, 88 hours of used leave was not properly deducted from the employee’s
leave balance due to the timesheet not being marked complete by the employee.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDL
a. develop procedures to ensure that all outstanding payroll discrepancies
are timely resolved; and
9 Timesheets with time not entered means that the employee did not record time in SPS, whereas
timesheets with time not submitted means that employee entered time in SPS but did not click
submit to finalize the timesheet before supervisory approval.
10 MDL could not readily provide us reports of the total hours not entered for fiscal years 2022,
2023, and 2024. However, as part of our testing, we identified timesheets for which hours were
not entered.
11 Our test selection items were based on the significance of unsubmitted or unapproved hours.
13

--- Page 16 ---
b. resolve the payroll discrepancies identified on the reports, including those
noted in this finding.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with MDL’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Office of the Secretary, Division of Administration, and Division
of Workforce Development and Adult Learning for the period beginning October
16, 2020 and ending July 31, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDL’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, payroll, federal funds, procurement
and disbursements activities, grants, and information systems security and control.
Our audit included a review of certain support services (such as payroll, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided by MDL to its divisions. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDL’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDL.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 16, 2020 to July 31, 2024, but may include transactions before
or after this period we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDL’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
15

--- Page 18 ---
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from MDL’s automated online financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as federal reimbursements. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MDL’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDL, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
16

--- Page 19 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the MDL’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDL that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MDL and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MDL’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDL regarding the results of our review of its
response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) Units
As of February 2025
Number
Most Recent Total
Name of Audit Areas Covered of Repeat
Report Date Findings
Findings12
 Consumer credit and oversight of
Office of Financial
1 financial institutions 09/20/24 1 1
Regulation
 Examinations and licensing
 DLI accounts receivable
 Monitoring of compliance with
Division of Labor certain laws pertaining to
2 01/06/23 1 1
and Industry (DLI) prevailing wages
 Safety inspections for boilers,
pressure vessels, and elevators
Division of
Unemployment  Benefit payments
3 11/15/22 13 3
Insurance (DUI)  DUI System implementation
Part II Benefits13
 Employer unemployment
DUI Part I contributions
Unemployment  Reimbursements from
4 05/4/22 6 0
Insurance Tax government agencies and certain
Collections non-profit organizations
 DUI System implementation
Division of
 DOPL cash receipts
Occupational and
5  Licensing 03/11/22 3 2
Professional
 Guaranty funds
Licensing (DOPL)
 DOR cash receipts
 Racing funds
 Distribution of video lottery
Division of Racing terminal funds
6 01/26/22 0 0
(DOR)  Certain licensee (racetrack)
requirements regarding the
reporting and distribution of pari-
mutuel wagering revenue
12 Our count of repeat findings does not include cybersecurity findings in compliance with the
requirements of the State Government Article Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
13 This audit had an unsatisfactory rating.
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
100 S. Charles Street Tower 1, 9th Floor
Baltimore, MD 21201
Portia Wu, Secretary
April 16, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Re: Legislative Audit Report for Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) – Office of the
Secretary, Division of Administration, and the Division of Workforce Development and Adult
Learning - Audit Period October 16, 2020, to July 31, 2024
Dear Mr. Tanen:
I am writing to formally acknowledge receipt of the April 2025 Legislative Audit Report of the
Maryland Department of Labor—Office of the Secretary, Division of Administration, and the
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning. The audit included five findings, and
the Agency Response Form addressing these findings is enclosed with this letter.
The Department is committed to addressing the identified issues and is actively working to
implement procedures to resolve the findings as outlined in the response. We anticipate
completing these corrective actions as expeditiously as possible.
I want to sincerely thank Senior Auditor Mr. James Fowler and his team for the professionalism,
courtesy, and constructive engagement demonstrated throughout the audit process. Their
valuable insights and recommendations are greatly appreciated and will contribute meaningfully
to the Department’s ongoing efforts to enhance accountability and operational efficiency. Please
extend our gratitude to all audit team members for their dedication and thoroughness.
Portia Wu
Secretary
Jason Perkins-Cohen
cc: Erin Roth, Assistant Secretary, Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Liz Williams, Executive Director, Office of Administration
Attachment: Agency Response Form
Phone: 410-230-6020 • Facebook: MarylandLabor • Internet: labor.maryland.gov
WES MOORE, GOVERNOR | ARUNA MILLER, LT. GOVERNOR | PORTIA WU, SECRETARY

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Agency Response Form
Year-End Closeout
Finding 1
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) could not support accrued
federal fund revenue entries totaling $204.7 million, including $67.6 million
which MDL had determined was not recoverable. In addition, MDL could
not document the subsequent recovery of the accrued funds.
We recommend that MDL
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported,
b. ensure the subsequent recovery of all accrued revenues, and
c. work with DBM to resolve current budgeting issues and to ensure that
future budgets are sufficient to fund routine operations.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of All year-end accruals will be calculated and supported by the federal
corrective action or draw in July of each year. In addition, MD Labor will strengthen internal
explain disagreement. controls to ensure all year-end revenue transactions are properly
documented through enhanced oversight, reconciliations, and staff
training.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or MD Labor is actively monitoring and reconciling accrued revenue to
explain disagreement. ensure all funds have been drawn down and received.
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or MD Labor is working with DBM to reconcile and determine if there is a
explain disagreement. deficit. A fee to administer Unemployment Insurance was introduced
and passed as part of the 2025 Budget Finance Reconciliation Act of
2025, HB 352, 8-521 (a)(4) to help offset the costs due to declining
federal funds and ensure sufficient funds for routine operations.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 2
MDL did not submit requests for reimbursement of federal fund
expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest income totaling at
least $450,000.
We recommend that MDL submit federal fund reimbursement requests as
soon as permitted under federal guidelines (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2025
Please provide details of MD Labor policy and procedures now request federal reimbursements
corrective action or monthly.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 3
MDL did not independently and timely approve certain manually processed
adjustments to employee pay and leave.
We recommend that MDL
a. independently and timely verify pay and leave balance adjustments to
ensure that only authorized adjustments have been processed; and
b. investigate any unsupported pay adjustments, including those noted
above, and take appropriate corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or The current practice is that the Payroll Supervisor presents the payroll
explain disagreement. input documents to the Human Resources Director via email. The HR
Director reviews the pay adjustment, authorization and supporting
documents received. The HR Director then responds in an email with the
approval of the forms submitted by the Payroll Supervisor. After this
approval, it is then submitted to the Office of Personnel Services and
Benefits. This process has been in place as early as November 7, 2022,
and will be formally incorporated in a Standard Operating Procedure
document to ensure consistency by 3/31/2025.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2025
Please provide details of The agency agrees that the requested documentation was not available
corrective action or on the date requested by the audit team. After further investigation, the
explain disagreement. supporting documentation to justify the adjustments was obtained.
Documentation was identified for 4 of the 4 test cases.
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Agency Response Form
The payroll and timekeeping unit will file pay adjustment documentation
in a shared Google folder to ensure that they are readily accessible.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
MDL did not ensure all timesheet discrepancies were resolved timely.
We recommend that MDL
a. develop procedures to ensure that all outstanding payroll discrepancies
are timely resolved; and
b. resolve the payroll discrepancies identified on the reports, including those
noted in this finding.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/18/2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or The agency timekeeper has identified the employees noted in the
explain disagreement. referenced discrepancies. Timesheet adjustments will be performed to
update the time entry records in Workday.
The Combined Time Report from Workday will be reviewed throughout
the payroll cycle. Unsubmitted and unapproved timesheets will be
identified and brought to the attention of both the employee and
immediate supervisor for resolution. The standard operating procedure
will be updated to include this requirement for our timekeeping
personnel.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/18/2025
Please provide details of The Combined Time Report from Workday will be reviewed throughout
corrective action or the payroll cycle. Unsubmitted and unapproved timesheets will be
explain disagreement. identified and brought to the attention of both the employee and
immediate supervisor for resolution. The standard operating procedure
will be updated to include this requirement for our timekeeping
personnel.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 5 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including
the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with MDL’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, MDL’s responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
James M. Fowler, CFE
Principal Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Peter W. Chong, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Jammie A. Brown
Thomas J. Kraemer
Jessica G. McRobie
Timothy Moon
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors