Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of General Services - Office of State Procurement to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2024 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/17/2025
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6802cd8eea24cae639a829e1
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:21:13.648890
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 17, 2025
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the
Department of General Services (DGS) Office of State Procurement (OSP) to resolve the four
repeat findings (that were addressed by six recommendations) in our May 3, 2023, audit report.
This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement specified in the April 2024 Joint
Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page 71. The JCR required that, prior to the release of $100,000 of its
administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2025, OSP must take corrective action on all repeat
audit findings on or before November 1, 2024.
The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget committees
listing each repeat audit finding along with a determination that each repeat finding was
corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget
committees to review and release the funds prior to the end of the fiscal year.
In accordance with the April 2024 JCR requirement, DGS on behalf of OSP provided a
status report to OLA, dated November 1, 2024, detailing corrective actions that had been
completed with respect to all four repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1). The DGS status report
indicated that corrective actions had been completed for the recommendations on all the repeat
findings (findings 2, 3, 4, and 5).
We reviewed the implementation status for all four repeat findings that DGS reported as
complete on the status report. Specifically, we reviewed the related documentation, performed
limited tests and analyses of the information, and held discussions with OSP personnel as
necessary to assess the implementation status of the related recommendations. Our review did
not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. As summarized in Exhibit 2, our review determined that OSP took sufficient action

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 17, 2025
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
to resolve the recommendations for findings 3, 4 and 5 but had not yet taken sufficient actions to
implement the recommendation for finding 2 as further described in Exhibit 3.
After discussing our review results, OSP generally agreed with the information presented.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review by OSP. We trust our
response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if you need additional
information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Atif T. Chaudhry, DGS
Chichi Nyagah-Nash, Deputy Secretary, DGS
Wallace D. Sermons II, Chief Procurement Officer, OSP
Joan M. Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget and
Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
David Propert, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 17, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 17, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
Finding 2
OSP did not require certain bidders on State contracts to utilize available functions in
eMMA to take advantage of security features intended to ensure the integrity of the bidding
process and did not always publish contract awards as required.
Recommendation 2b
We recommend that OSP comply with State procurement laws and regulations by
publishing contract awards on eMMA within 30 days of the contract award (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2b
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
6/30/2024
11/1/2024
Topline:
DGS enhanced written guidance to procurement officers and
established regular audits to identify instances of non-compliance.
Additional information:
To help maintain compliance with this requirement, DGS created and
distributed a “Procurement Timeline Checklist” for procurement
Please provide
officers and their supervisors, which specifically highlights the step for
details of corrective
posting on eMMA. DGS has also updated the MS-22 for procurement
action taken.
officers to explicitly state the requirement to post contract awards on
eMMA within 30 days of contract award.
To ensure ongoing compliance, DGS conducts monthly and quarterly
audits. If an issue is identified, the Director of Procurement Operations
and Associate Directors are notified to follow-up and address the
identified issue.
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
Finding 3
OSP did not adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that were specifically
subject to its oversight.
Recommendation 3a
We recommend that OSP ensure that PRRB monitor agency procurements by conducting
audits of delegated procurements in accordance with State regulations and its procedures
(repeat). In this regard, PRRB should establish a schedule to ensure audits are conducted
on a regular basis (such as once every three to four years).

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 17, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Recommendation 3a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
3/31/2024
11/1/2024
Topline:
DGS established a new structure for regularly auditing agency
procurements, and is developing enhanced guidance for staff to
implement more efficient and focused audits.
Additional information:
To address this finding, DGS evaluated and revamped the Agency
Procurement Compliance Program (“APCP”) and hired a new Program
Manager with prior audit experience. DGS established a new approach
to monitoring agency procurements under the Agency’s authority and
oversight, which focuses on conducting "Agency Health Checks” on a
Please provide details
routine basis (inclusive of audits of delegated procurements) and added
of corrective action
taken. levels of oversight any time an agency requests additional delegation.
As of March 31, 2024, the program updated its manual and established
a schedule for performing “Agency Health Checks” for all agencies,
and steady progress has been made in conducting audits of agency
procurements since implementing the new program.
The unit is also creating additional guidelines for the DGS OSP
Procurement Operations to use for staff conducting audits to increase
the number of Agencies/Procurement Files being reviewed and to
identify risk factors and red flags for more efficient and focused audits.
In addition, DGS has added a Policy Unit to address policy changes or
clarifications that are needed based on the audit findings.
Recommendation 3b
We recommend that OSP ensure that PRRB’s workpaper conclusions are consistent with
the audit report or explained and that the audits are comprehensive (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3b
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
3/31/2024
11/1/2024
Topline:
DGS has established and documented a standardized process for
collecting and maintaining files related to audits.
Please provide details
of corrective action
Additional Information:
taken.
The revamped Agency Procurement Compliance Program has
established a systematic process for collecting and retaining work
papers and creating audit reports that reflect those papers. In addition,

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 17, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
training focused on documentation best practices and review checklists
has been provided, and the process is periodically reviewed with the
unit.
To ensure ongoing compliance, the unit regularly reviews the reports
and files.
Providers with Procurement Preference
Finding 4
OSP lacked documentation that it independently determined and published the fair market
prices of MCE goods and services.
Recommendation 4a
We recommend that DGS, through OSP, in its role as a member of the Pricing and
Selection Committee for Preferred Providers, perform independent documented reviews of
the fair market value of existing and new MCE goods and services in a timely manner
(repeat).
Status of Recommendation 4a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
6/30/2024
11/1/2024
Topline:
DGS has initiated a new process with MCE and BISM to receive
pricing timely and perform a review of fair market value. DGS also
created guidance for the PSC voting process.
Additional Information:
DGS has established a scheduled timeline to contact MCE and BISM
to request new pricing for each fiscal year. Once the new pricing list or
Please provide details
requests for updated pricing are received, the assigned DGS OSP
of corrective action
taken. Procurement Officer conducts the Fair Market Value (FMV) price
testing to ensure prices are valued correctly. This FMV Test
worksheet is uploaded to the Shared Drive as proof of FMV Testing.
MCE sends its pricing file during the last quarter of the fiscal year for
the next fiscal year's pricing. BISM’s price testing takes place in the
second quarter of each fiscal year for the current fiscal year.
To ensure ongoing compliance, DGS created a policy and procedures
for conducting the FMV price testing and verification process.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 17, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 5
OSP did not monitor Maryland Works to ensure it coordinated contracting activity in
accordance with the EWP.
Recommendation 5a
We recommend that OSP monitor Maryland Works to ensure that it is fulfilling its CE
responsibilities required by State law (repeat), including ensuring providers recommended
for contract awards are eligible for those awards.
Status of Recommendation 5a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
3/31/2024
11/1/2024
Topline:
DGS checks each month’s EWP contracts to confirm they are verified
providers as listed on DORS’ website.
Additional Information:
DGS serves as the PSC chair. The chair met with the other agency
members of the PSC to establish guidelines for reviewing the prices
from the preferred providers for the market research and requested that
Please provide details DORS affirm in writing that the recommended Employment Works
of corrective action
Program (EWP) is approved before moving forward with the preferred
taken.
provider contract. As needed, the PSC members meet prior to the
monthly meeting with the preferred providers to clarify any concerns
with the EWP pricing.
To ensure compliance, DGS checks each month's list of EWP contracts
to be reviewed and approved by the PSC to ensure that they are
verified DORS providers as listed on DORS’ website. DGS also meets
regularly with Maryland Works as the Coordinating Entity (CE) to
ensure the terms and conditions of the MOU are satisfied.
Recommendation 5b
We recommend that OSP monitor Maryland Works to ensure that it is fulfilling its CE
responsibilities required by State law (repeat), including that cost justifications are in the
best interest of the State.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 17, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Recommendation 5b
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
12/31/2023
11/1/2024
Topline:
DGS will continue to monitor whether Maryland Works is fulfilling its
CE responsibilities and has implemented a plan to ensure pricing is in
the best interest of the state.
Additional Information:
Please provide details As summarized in the response above to 5a, DGS has taken steps to
of corrective action
monitor whether Maryland Works is fulfilling its Coordinating Entity
taken.
responsibilities.
Response 4a referenced a plan shared with Senator Lam and DLS to
update the existing MCE and BISM market analysis policy and PSC
voting guidelines. As this plan continues to be implemented, we
anticipate a better understanding of cost justifications to ensure that the
pricing is in the best interest of the State.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 17, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA)
May 3, 2023 Audit Report on the Department of General Services (DGS) –
Office of State Procurement (OSP)
DGS
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Status Based on
Reported
Findings OLA Review
Status
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)
2. We recommend that OSP
Not Resolved
b. comply with State procurement laws and Completed
(In Progress)
regulations by publishing contract awards on
eMMA within 30 days of the contract award.
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
3. We recommend that OSP
a. ensure that the Policy, Procurement Review, and
Reporting Bureau (PRRB) monitor agency Completed Resolved
procurements by conducting audits of delegated
procurements in accordance with State regulations
and its procedures.
b. ensure that PRRB’s workpaper conclusions are
consistent with the audit report or explained and Completed Resolved
that the audits are comprehensive.
Preferred Providers
4. We recommend that DGS through OSP, in its role as a
member of the Pricing and Selection Committee for
Preferred Providers
Completed Resolved
a. perform independent documented reviews of the
fair market value of existing and new Maryland
Correctional Enterprises goods and services in a
timely manner.
5. We recommend that OSP monitor Maryland Works to
ensure that it is fulfilling its coordinating entity
responsibilities required by State law, including Completed Resolved
a. ensuring providers recommended for contract
awards are eligible for those awards.
b. that cost justifications are in the best interest of the
Completed Resolved
State.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 17, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Comments on Findings OLA Assessed as Unresolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 2
We recommend that Department of General Services (DGS) – Office of State Procurement
(OSP)
b. comply with State procurement laws and regulations by publishing contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) within 30 days of the contract award (repeat).
Status as determined by DGS – Completed
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Although DGS indicated in its status report that it implemented this recommendation on June 30,
2024, our review of contracts awarded after this date disclosed OSP did not timely publish the
contract awards on eMMA. Specifically, our test of 10 contracts awarded between July 2024 and
January 2025 totaling $99.1 million, disclosed that 3 contracts awarded between July and
September 2024 were not published on eMMA as of February 2025. In addition, OSP did not
publish one contract awarded in August 2024 until January 2025.