Title: Review of the Findings and Report by the State Chief Information Security Officer of Actions Taken by Eight Agencies to Resolve Certain Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
Date: 04/24/2025
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=680a97b2b445801f1349731b
Extracted: 2025-06-20T09:22:29.430630
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 24, 2025
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing Miller Senate Office Building, Room 220
11 Bladen Street 11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
House Appropriations Committee Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 121 Lowe House Office Building, Room 312
6 Bladen Street 6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with a requirement contained in the April 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report
(JCR), pages 55 and 56, the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the findings and
report by the State Chief Information Security Officer (SCISO) of actions taken by eight
agencies to resolve certain repeat audit findings in calendar year 2023 OLA audit reports. The
eight agencies identified in the JCR are the Maryland State Department of Education, Maryland
Environmental Service, Department of Budget and Management – Office of the Secretary,
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services, State Treasurer’s Office, State Board of
Elections, Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration and Office
of the Secretary, and Department of Commerce.
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $250,000 of the appropriation made for the
purpose of Executive Direction for the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) for fiscal
year 2025, the eight agencies must have met with the SCISO concerning their repeat
cybersecurity1 findings. The meeting was to identify and document a path for resolution of any
outstanding issues and to confirm that the agencies have taken corrective action with respect to
their cybersecurity audit findings, including articulating any ongoing associated costs and a
timeline for resolution if the corrective action is not complete. In addition, the JCR required the
SCISO to submit a report to OLA by February 1, 2025 addressing corrective actions taken, a
path and timeline for resolution of any outstanding issues, and any ongoing costs associated with
1 The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), as processes
or capabilities wherein systems, communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation. Cybersecurity-related findings are designated by OLA using
our professional judgment and a conservative interpretation of this definition.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 24, 2025
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
corrective actions. Finally, the JCR provided that OLA submit a report by May 1, 2025 to the
budget committees and the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee listing each repeat audit
finding, along with information that demonstrates the agencies’ commitment to correct each
repeat audit finding.
In accordance with the April 2024 JCR requirement, the SCISO provided a report, dated
February 2025, summarizing its assessment of the actions taken by the eight agencies with
respect to the repeat audit findings. The SCISO’s status report indicated that five agencies had
taken sufficient corrective actions to address their repeat findings, one agency had taken
corrective actions to address one repeat finding and agreed to a SCISO recommended course of
action to address its other repeat finding, and two agencies presented acceptable courses of
action to address their respective repeat findings.
We reviewed the SCISO’s status report to assess the implementation status of the related
recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Based on our review of the conclusions
summarized in the SCISO’s report and additional information provided, it is our opinion that the
conclusions reported in the status report were accurate. Our conclusions were based on the
information reported and did not include a review of the reported actions at each of the eight
agencies to ensure they were implemented and were effective in establishing sufficient
cybersecurity controls to address the concerns noted in the findings. Such efforts will be
included in our next scheduled audits of these agencies.
This public letter differs from the confidential letter previously provided to the
addressees, as detailed information and exhibits necessary for the budget committees and the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee to review and comment on the relevant information has
been redacted. This redaction was undertaken in accordance with the State Government Article
Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
We advised the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) and DBM of the results
of our review. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended by DoIT and DBM during this
review and the willingness of all agencies to address the cybersecurity audit issues and
implement appropriate corrective actions.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if
you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- April 24, 2025
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
cc: Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Katie Olson Savage, Department of Information Technology
Jason Silva, State Chief Technology Officer and Acting SCISO, Department of
Information Technology
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services