Title: Maryland Department of Emergency Management
Date: 05/12/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68226c670b6f2bc95586bd0e
Extracted: 2025-07-02T15:46:38.456294
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Emergency Management
May 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 12, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Emergency Management (MDEM) for the period beginning October 1, 2021 and
ending September 15, 2024. MDEM is primarily responsible for ensuring the
State is prepared to deal with emergencies beyond the capabilities of local
authorities. MDEM also coordinates disaster preparedness activities with its
federal and local counterparts and is responsible for administering loan and grant
programs that provide funding to volunteer fire companies.
Our audit disclosed that MDEM did not ensure that it requested federal
reimbursement for all public assistance grant expenditures. As a result, MDEM
did not recover $691.6 million timely, including $255.7 million that was still
outstanding as of January 2025, and lost investment income totaling at least $19.2
million. MDEM also did not verify that all federal fund reimbursement requests
were subsequently received.
Our audit also disclosed that MDEM was unable to support the propriety of an
accrued federal fund revenue entry for COVID-related funds totaling
approximately $882.1 million or the subsequent recovery of certain of the funds.
Specifically, MDEM had only recovered $520.9 million of this amount as of
December 2024. While some or all of the remaining $361.2 million may
ultimately be recovered, to the extent that the federal funds are not available, State
general funds may be needed to cover any related deficits.
Finally, our audit disclosed that MDEM did not have sufficient processes to
ensure Volunteer Company Assistance Fund loan activity was properly recorded,

--- Page 4 ---
related loan payments were properly deposited, and delinquent loan payments
were pursued as required.
MDEM’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address the audit
issues. While MDEM generally agrees with the recommendations in this report,
we identified one statement in its response requiring an “auditor’s comment.”
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDEM.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Federal Funds
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Emergency Management 6
(MDEM) did not ensure federal reimbursement was obtained for all
public assistance grant expenditures, resulting in the failure to recover
$691.6 million timely and lost investment income totaling at least $19.2
million.
Finding 2 – MDEM did not ensure all federal funds requested for 7
reimbursement were received.
Accrued Revenue Transactions
Finding 3 – MDEM could not support the propriety of an accrued 8
federal fund revenue entry totaling approximately $882.1 million
recorded at the end of fiscal year 2024 or the subsequent recovery of
certain of these funds.
Volunteer Company Assistance Fund Loans
Finding 4 – MDEM did not have sufficient procedures and controls 9
to ensure Volunteer Company Assistance Fund loan activity was
properly recorded, related loan payments were properly deposited,
and delinquent loan payments were pursued as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) was created by
Chapters 287 and 288, Laws of Maryland 2021 as a principal department in the
Executive Branch effective October 1, 2021. MDEM coordinates Statewide
efforts in the event of emergencies and disasters that are beyond the capabilities of
local authorities. MDEM also coordinates disaster preparedness activities with its
federal and local counterparts and, through mitigation services, strives to reduce
or eliminate the impact of future disasters. Additionally, MDEM is responsible
for administering loan and grant programs (such as the Volunteer Company
Assistance Fund) that provide funding to volunteer fire companies for facilities
and equipment. These activities were previously the responsibility of the former
Maryland Emergency Management Agency, a unit within the Department of
Military.
The aforementioned legislation also transferred certain responsibilities for the
Maryland 9-1-1 Board (Board) from the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS) to MDEM. The Board is funded by, and
responsible for, the 9-1-1 Trust Fund (Fund), which consists of revenue received
from State and local fees, and a fee charged on prepaid wireless services (as well
as investment earnings on the fund). MDEM is responsible for budgeting and
disbursing the State portion of the funds to cover internal costs to support the
Board and to the counties for eligible projects. Activity related to receipt of fees
and accuracy of fee totals remitted to the State are included in our audit of the
Comptroller of Maryland (COM).1
As noted in Figure 1, according to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2024,
MDEM’s expenditures totaled approximately $905.1 million, the majority of
which were funded with federal funds. During the period from fiscal year 2022
through 2024, MDEM had vacancy rates that ranged from 11.8 to 40.6 percent.
As of June 30, 2024, approximately 20.4 percent of the total 98 positions were
vacant. These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in
this report.
1 Chapter 605, Laws of Maryland 2020, effective May 8, 2020, require the COM, in consultation
with the Board, to adopt procedures for auditing surcharge collections and remittance by
telephone companies and commercial mobile radio service providers of 9-1-1 fees collected. In
addition, the law authorizes the COM to compel compliance with a related audit.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
MDEM Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 78
Vacant 20
Total 98
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 11,227,468
Technical and Special Fees 5,939,065
Operating Expenses 887,889,766
Total $905,056,299
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 11,249,336
Special Fund 160,917,629
Federal Fund 732,260,142
Reimbursable Fund 629,192
Total $905,056,299
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of one of the six
findings contained in our DPSCS – Central Operations audit report dated
November 20, 2019. See Figure 2 for the results of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The annual report of 9-1-1 Trust Fund
Finding 6 Not repeated
activities was not submitted as required by law.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Federal Funds
Background
The Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) administers
various federal grant programs. According to State records, MDEM’s federal
fund grant expenditures during fiscal years 2022 through 2024 totaled
approximately $1.37 billion. Our review focused on MDEM’s accounting of
public assistance grants, which accounted for $1.14 billion (84 percent) of
expenditures during this period.
Finding 1
MDEM did not ensure federal reimbursement was obtained for all public
assistance grant expenditures, resulting in the failure to recover $691.6
million timely and lost investment income totaling at least $19.2 million.
Analysis
MDEM did not ensure that it requested federal reimbursement for all public
assistance grant expenditures. MDEM advised that it submitted quarterly
reimbursement requests to the federal government based on federal grant
expenditures recorded in the State’s accounting records. Our review disclosed
that MDEM did not periodically reconcile its federal public assistance grant
expenditures to the amounts requested from the federal government to ensure all
eligible costs were recovered. As a result, MDEM did not recover all federal
funds timely.
We analyzed MDEM’s COVID related grant activity, which totaled $1.13 billion
fiscal years 2022 through 2024 (virtually all of its public assistance funding). Our
analysis disclosed that, as of December 2024, MDEM had not requested
reimbursement for $255.7 million in federal fund expenditures dating back to
February 2022. For example, MDEM had not requested reimbursement for
expenditures made between April and June 2022 totaling $30.8 million.
In addition, reimbursement for expenditures totaling $435.9 million was requested
between 2 to 27 months after the expenditures were eligible for federal
reimbursement. For example, MDEM did not request reimbursement for
expenditures totaling $25.4 million made in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022
until July 2024.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Based on our calculations, the failure to timely recover these funds resulted in lost
investment income2 totaling at least $19.2 million as of October 2024; MDEM
will continue to incur additional lost interest until the aforementioned $255.7
million is recovered. MDEM advised that it believed this amount was still
recoverable but as of January 2025 it had not requested the funds from the federal
government.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDEM
a. periodically reconcile federal fund expenditures to amounts requested
from the federal government;
b. identify any amounts not recovered and determine whether the funds are
still available for recovery; and
c. timely recover any amounts determined to be recoverable, including the
amounts noted above.
Finding 2
MDEM did not ensure all federal funds requested for reimbursement were
received.
Analysis
MDEM did not ensure all federal fund reimbursement requests were subsequently
received and credited to the designated MDEM account by the Office of the State
Treasurer (STO).3 As a result, MDEM lacked assurance that the funds were
ultimately received.
Our test of 10 material grant disbursements totaling $190.4 million did not
identify any instances in which the related federal fund reimbursement request
was not received. Nevertheless, given the significant amount of federal funds
associated with these grants and the STO acting as an intermediary for the
collection of the funds, MDEM should establish a documented procedure to
ensure each federal fund request is received.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDEM perform documented verifications to ensure
that all federal funds requested were received.
2 Lost investment income refers to the amount that the State would have earned if the funds had
been invested by the State Treasurer (based on the State’s actual return on investment) instead of
being used to finance federal fund expenditures.
3 Although federal funds are requested by MDEM, the STO actually receives the funds from the
federal government, which is documented by the STO posting the receipt activity to the
appropriate account.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Accrued Revenue Transactions
Finding 3
MDEM could not support the propriety of an accrued federal fund revenue
entry totaling approximately $882.1 million recorded at the end of fiscal year
2024 or the subsequent recovery of certain of these funds.
Analysis
MDEM was unable to provide documentation to support the propriety of an
accrued federal fund revenue entry for COVID-related funds totaling
approximately $882.1 million or the subsequent recovery of the funds. At the end
of fiscal year 2024, MDEM recorded five accrued federal fund revenue entries
totaling $903.6 million, consisting of three positive accrued revenue entries
totaling $891.3 million and two negative accrued revenue entries totaling $12.3
million.
MDEM Could Not Support an Accrued Revenue Entry
Our test of one accrued revenue entry4 totaling $882.1 million disclosed that
MDEM recorded the entry to offset the negative balance in one account without
verifying that the amount recorded was valid and collectable from the federal
government. The amount accrued seemed questionable because MDEM
management advised us that it pursued federal reimbursement quarterly, and the
amount accrued exceeded the total fiscal year 2024 expenditures of $698.8
million.
MDEM Could Not Document Recovery of Recorded Accrued Revenue
MDEM also could not readily document that it had requested and collected
certain of the amounts accrued. As of December 6, 2024, MDEM had only
recovered $520.9 million of the $882.1 million (59 percent). As of January 15,
2025, MDEM was still in the process of investigating the disposition of the
remaining $361.2 million. While some or all of the remaining funds may
ultimately be recovered, to the extent that the federal funds are not available, State
general funds may be needed to cover any related deficits.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s year-end closing
instructions provide that accrued revenue transactions should reflect amounts that
are collectable within 60 days of the end of the fiscal year and that revenue should
be recognized in the same fiscal year the expenditure is made. The closing
instructions also require that detail documentation to support the transactions be
4 We selected this test item based on materiality.
8

--- Page 11 ---
maintained. This condition was also disclosed in our report on the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2024.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDEM
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported,
b. analyze the balances in the federal fund accounts to determine the
collectability of any deficit balances and proper disposition of any surplus
balances, and
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work
with the Department of Budget and Management to resolve any related
deficits.
Volunteer Company Assistance Fund Loans
Finding 4
MDEM did not have sufficient procedures and controls to ensure Volunteer
Company Assistance Fund (VCAF) loan activity was properly recorded,
related loan payments were properly deposited, and delinquent loan
payments were pursued as required.
Analysis
MDEM did not have sufficient procedures and controls to ensure VCAF loan
activity was properly recorded, related loan payments were properly deposited,
and delinquent loan payments were pursued as required. VCAF provides loans to
volunteer fire companies for the purchase, replacement, or improvement of
firefighting and rescue equipment.5 According to MDEM records, as of October
2024, there were 62 active VCAF loans with receivable balances totaling $23.1
million.
Loan Activity Was Not Independently Reviewed for Propriety
MDEM did not have an independent review process to ensure that loan activity
was properly recorded in its loan system. Specifically, one employee was
unilaterally responsible for authorizing loan fund disbursements, updating the
related accounts receivable records, changing loan terms, and reconciling loan
activity to State’s accounting records. As a result, errors and/or improper activity
5 The Maryland State Firefighters Association, on behalf of volunteer fire companies, submits
approved VCAF loan applications for final approval by the Board of Public Works and
subsequent loan servicing by MDEM.
9

--- Page 12 ---
could occur without detection. Our test of 10 loans6 totaling $7.8 million did not
identify any discrepancies or improper activity.
MDEM Did Not Verify that Loan Payments Were Deposited
MDEM did not verify that loan payments were deposited into the State’s bank
account. According to MDEM’s records, between February 2022 and August
2024 VCAF loan payments totaled $7.8 million. The Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual requires independent verification of
collections to deposit. MDEM advised that this process was not implemented
due, in part, to staffing shortages. Our test of 10 days’ collections7 during this
period totaling $2.1 million disclosed that all 10 were deposited intact.
MDEM Did Not Track and Pursue Collection of Delinquent Loan Payments
MDEM did not track and pursue collection of delinquent loan payments and did
not assess late fees as permitted by the loan agreements. Our review of 227
payments totaling approximately $3 million related to 27 loans8 disclosed that 19
payments totaling approximately $514,900 associated with 10 loans were made
between 1 to 12 months late. MDEM could not document that it pursued
collection of delinquent loan payments and did not assess late fees as permitted by
the loan agreements.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDEM
a. establish procedures that independently ensure all existing loans have
been properly recorded in the loan system and future loans or changes to
loan terms are entered accurately and timely,
b. perform an independent reconciliation between MDEM’s loan system
and the State’s accounting records,
c. ensure that a documented independent verification of recorded
collections to deposit is performed, and
d. pursue collection of accounts receivable in accordance with loan
agreements and assess appropriate late fees for delinquent payments.
6 We selected material loans from the 17 loans totaling $11 million issued during our audit period.
7 The test items were selected based on the materiality of deposit in our audit period.
8 We arbitrarily selected 36 payments from the 10 days’ collections selected for testing and
identified if the payment was late. For the payments that were late, we expanded to test all
payments in our audit period for the related loans.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Emergency Management (MDEM), for the period beginning October 1, 2021 and
ending September 15, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDEM’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, federal funds,
grants, Volunteer Company Assistance Fund loans, Maryland 9-1-1 Board
disbursements, and payroll. Our information systems security and control review
addressed general controls, authentication controls, firewall security and intrusion
prevention, malware prevention, and cloud computing. In addition, we reviewed
one of the six findings contained in our audit report on the Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services – Central Operations dated November 20, 2019.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDEM’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDEM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 1, 2021 to September 15, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDEM’s operations. Generally,
11

--- Page 14 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MDEM’s grants management system for the purpose
of selecting test items and performing data analytics. We performed various tests
of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
MDEM’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDEM, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDEM’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDEM that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MDEM’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDEM regarding the
results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX
May 8, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Thank you and the Office of Legislative Audits team for working with the Maryland
Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) on our recent audit. Enclosed is
our agency response form to the Legislative Audit Report for the period beginning
October 1, 2021, and ending September 15, 2024. This is MDEM’s first audit as a
Department, an agency less than four-years old during the audit period.
MDEM has implemented control processes and made progress in areas described in
this report, including filling key vacancies that may have contributed to the findings.
The vast majority of MDEM’s Federal grants are reimbursable grants. These require
adherence to a precise, extensive Federal process that adds time to the
reimbursement process.
MDEM has administered over $2.1 billion in obligated FEMA public assistance awards
for the COVID-19 disaster alone during this audit period. MDEM has ensured Federal
reimbursement of public assistance grant expenditures follow Federal policy. The
period of performance for these grants has not ended and remains open–we will
continue to seek reimbursements for eligible activities until the end of the grant.
The Department takes audit findings seriously. We believe our corrective actions will
sufficiently resolve any findings. Please contact Anna Sierra, Assistant Secretary,
Strategy & External Affairs at anna.sierra1@maryland.gov if you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Russell Strickland
1

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Emergency Management
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 1
MDEM did not ensure federal reimbursement was obtained for all public
assistance grant expenditures, resulting in the failure to recover $691.6
million timely and lost investment income totaling at least $19.2 million.
We recommend that MDEM
a. periodically reconcile federal fund expenditures to amounts requested
from the federal government;
b. identify any amounts not recovered and determine whether the funds are
still available for recovery; and
c. timely recover any amounts determined to be recoverable, including the
amounts noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5-31-2025
Please provide details of MDEM has established procedures to regularly reconcile federal fund
corrective action or expenditures to amounts requested from the federal government.
explain disagreement. MDEM is making significant changes as the Federal Government lifts
the grant funding pauses. MDEM will be filling vacant positions in the
Finance branch to manage this process. In addition, the Public
Assistance (PA) grants’ team will initiate and collaboratively complete
the drawdown process of federal funding within 30 days of the funds
being disbursed to the subgrantee. Ensuring that the itemized requests
will be smaller as they will consist of fewer projects and should be less
prone to error. Smaller, more frequent drawdowns will increase
efficiency and allow for more thorough reviews.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6-30-2025
Please provide details of The amount remaining to draw is $119m. The remaining funds will be
corrective action or requested, in compliance with Federal timelines for reconciliation and
explain disagreement. closeout. The grant has not reached the end of its performance period
therefore, all amounts are determined recoverable.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of Emergency Management
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Of the $691m mentioned, MDEM has requested $572 mil. The grant has
corrective action or not reached the end of its performance period; the remaining amounts
explain disagreement. are recoverable.
Auditor’s Comment: MDEM indicates that our analysis is not factually accurate;
however, it did not provide any additional comments to explain its position.
Accordingly, we stand by the accuracy of our analysis and related
recommendations.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Emergency Management
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MDEM did not ensure all federal funds requested for reimbursement were
received.
We recommend that MDEM perform documented verifications to ensure
that all federal funds requested were received.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of MDEM has established procedures to perform verification to ensure that
corrective action or all federal funds requested were received. This has also been
explain disagreement. documented.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Emergency Management
Agency Response Form
Accrued Revenue Transactions
Finding 3
MDEM could not support the propriety of an accrued federal fund revenue
entry totaling approximately $882.1 million recorded at the end of fiscal year
2024 or the subsequent recovery of certain of these funds.
We recommend that MDEM
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported,
b. analyze the balances in the federal fund accounts to determine the
collectability of any deficit balances and proper disposition of any surplus
balances, and
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work
with the Department of Budget and Management to resolve any related
deficits.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9-30-2025
Please provide details of MDEM will revise the timeline for reconciliations of year-end revenue
corrective action or transactions to ensure that they are properly supported.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6-30-2025
Please provide details of MDEM will analyze the balances in the federal fund accounts to
corrective action or determine the collectability of any deficit balances and proper
explain disagreement. disposition of any surplus balances. The funds referred to in this report
consist primarily of projects that are not at a point programmatically
where we can issue the funds to the subgrantee and subsequently draw
them down. The drawdown of funds will occur after funds have been
disbursed to the subgrantee.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of MDEM currently has no uncollectable federal funds. Should an instance
corrective action or arise, MDEM will work with the Department of Budget and
explain disagreement. Management to resolve any related deficits.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Emergency Management
Agency Response Form
Volunteer Company Assistance Fund Loans
Finding 4
MDEM did not have sufficient procedures and controls to ensure Volunteer
Company Assistance Fund (VCAF) loan activity was properly recorded,
related loan payments were properly deposited, and delinquent loan
payments were pursued as required.
We recommend that MDEM
a. establish procedures that independently ensure all existing loans have
been properly recorded in the loan system and future loans or changes to
loan terms are entered accurately and timely,
b. perform an independent reconciliation between MDEM’s loan system
and the State’s accounting records,
c. ensure that a documented independent verification of recorded
collections to deposit is performed, and
d. pursue collection of accounts receivable in accordance with loan
agreements and assess appropriate late fees for delinquent payments.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5-30-2025
Please provide details of MDEM has established procedures that ensure all existing loans have
corrective action or been recorded in the loan monitoring system and future loans or changes
explain disagreement. to loan terms are entered accurately and timely. The Finance team
leadership vacancy has now been filled, who will perform an
independent verification as recommended.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6-30-2025
Please provide details of MDEM has a process in place for reconciling the loan servicing system
corrective action or and state accounting records. The Finance team leadership vacancy has
explain disagreement. now been filled, who will perform independent reconciliation as
recommended.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6-30-2025
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Emergency Management
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MDEM has a procedure in place to ensure that a documented
corrective action or independent verification of recorded collections to deposit is performed.
explain disagreement. The Finance team leadership vacancy has now been filled, who will
perform documented verification of the recorded collection deposits.
Recommendation 4d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6-30-2025
Please provide details of MDEM will pursue collection of accounts receivable in accordance with
corrective action or loan agreements and assess appropriate late fees for delinquent
explain disagreement. payments.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Dorian A. Fournier, CIA
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditors
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Ali A. Dayya
Hilary B. Gugig
Daniel G. Johnson
Staff Auditors