Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration
Date: 05/16/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=682cb4284f179e4c76a86422
Extracted: 2025-07-02T15:47:10.257582
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
November 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Outstanding Request for Attorney General Opinion on State Excise Taxes 5
Red Line 6
Purple Line 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 1 – The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) used certain 9
contracts as a means to obtain services that were outside the scope of
those contracts, circumventing competitive procurement requirements,
and related task orders lacked details of contract deliverables.
Increases in hourly rates charged were excessive based on MTA
guidelines.
* Finding 2 – MTA did not always adhere to State procurement regulations 11
with respect to sole source procurements, contract award requirements,
and bid documentation, and certain monitoring efforts were not
adequate.
* Finding 3 – Proper internal controls were not established over the 14
processing of purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Interagency Agreements
* Finding 4 – MTA used interagency agreements to circumvent State 15
procurement regulations that require competitive bidding.
Finding 5 – MTA did not follow up on the results of a review conducted 16
by its Office of Audits regarding payments made to and deliverables
required from a State university under an interagency agreement. The
review disclosed, for example, approximately $725,000 in payments
that should be recovered.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
* Finding 6 – Interagency agreements were not adequately monitored. 17
Task orders were not sufficiently detailed to allow for adequate
monitoring and certain payments were not consistent with or were
not provided for in the related task orders.
Mobility Paratransit Program
Finding 7 – MTA lacked adequate controls to ensure that only eligible 19
individuals received Program services.
Union Payroll and Pensions
Finding 8 – MTA had not established adequate controls over its union 21
payroll and pension processes. All payroll employees had capabilities
granting them complete control over payroll transactions.
Cash Receipts
Finding 9 – MTA did not adequately control and account for collections 23
received at its Consignment Center and Transit Store, and bus fare
collections were not always deposited timely.
Equipment
Finding 10 – MTA did not ensure that all equipment purchases were 25
properly recorded in its detailed equipment records.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 11 – Malware protection for MTA’s computers was not sufficient 25
to provide the MTA with adequate assurance that its computers were
properly protected.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 27
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA), a transportation business unit of the
Maryland Department of Transportation, is responsible for the construction,
operation, and maintenance of the Baltimore metropolitan area transit system and
for commuter services in suburban areas of the State. Transit modes in operation
primarily include the Metro subway, bus, light rail, and the Maryland Rail
Commuter service. MTA is headquartered in Baltimore City and maintains a
workforce of approximately 3,400 employees. According to State records, during
fiscal year 2017, MTA’s operating and capital expenditures totaled approximately
$1.42 billion. These expenditures were funded by special funds totaling
approximately $1.06 billion and federal funds totaling approximately $360
million.
Outstanding Request for Attorney General Opinion on State
Excise Taxes
In our preceding audit report, we commented that there appeared to be conflicting
legal advice regarding MTA’s exemption from paying State excise taxes to the
Comptroller of Maryland for fuel used in Mobility Paratransit Program (MPP)
service vehicles. In our audit report, we noted that, in February 2013, the
Comptroller’s legal counsel advised MTA that its MPP service did not qualify for
an exemption and refund under the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland since the MPP service did not operate on regular fixed schedules and
routes, which was one of the criteria for exemption. Our report also noted,
however, that, according to the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, with the exception of water and sewer charges imposed by the State or
any of its agencies or political subdivisions, MTA (including its activities and the
property it owns or controls) is exempt from all taxes, assessments, and charges,
whether State or local. We brought this law to the attention of MTA’s legal
counsel in June 2014 and, in February 2015, MTA requested a formal opinion
from the Office of the Attorney General to resolve the issue. As of May 2018, no
formal opinion had been issued and the issue remained unresolved.
According to its records, MTA purchased 2.7 million gallons of fuel for MPP
vehicles during fiscal year 2015 and paid approximately $765,000 in State excise
taxes during that year alone. MTA also paid State excise taxes during fiscal years
2016, 2017, and 2018; however, the amount of taxes paid was not readily
available.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Red Line
The Baltimore Red Line was a proposed 14.1 mile east-west light rail transit line
connecting Woodlawn in Baltimore County to Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical
Center, traveling through west and downtown Baltimore. On June 24, 2011, the
Federal Transit Administration (FTA) approved the project for the preliminary
engineering phase and, in August 2013, MTA commenced advancement of the
project to the final design phase. The project was expected to cost approximately
$3 billion with construction beginning in 2015. Sources of funding were to
include the State’s Transportation Trust Fund (TTF), federal funds, public-private
partnership funds, and local government funds.
On June 25, 2015, the Governor discontinued the Red Line project, citing the
required construction of a $1 billion tunnel through the heart of Baltimore City
and the design’s failure to integrate effectively with Baltimore City’s existing
infrastructure. MTA advised the FTA in August 2015 that the project was
discontinued; the project’s design phase was about 70 to 75 percent complete at
that time. According to MTA’s records, project expenditures totaled
approximately $296 million as of June 30, 2017, consisting of $219 million from
the TTF and $77 million in federal funds. MTA management advised that the
federal funding did not have to be repaid since the funds were used for their
intended purposes.
Purple Line
The Purple Line is a 16.2 mile, 21-station light rail line currently under
construction. In November 2013, the Board of Public Works (BPW) designated
the Purple Line project as a public-private partnership (P3) and, in April 2016,
MTA obtained approval from BPW to enter into a P3 agreement with a
consortium consisting of three private equity vendors to serve as the
concessionaire for the Purple Line. The concessionaire is responsible for
designing, constructing, partially financing, operating, and maintaining the Purple
Line over a 36-year term. As of October 2017, the projected opening date for the
Purple Line was March 2022.
As of October 2017, the projected construction cost of the Purple Line project,
which includes purchasing light rail vehicles for the line, and property
acquisitions and related relocation costs, was approximately $2.57 billion (net
present value). MTA is using a combination of private funds ($1.015 billion from
the concessionaire), federal funds ($936 million), and State and local funding
($623.6 million) for the project. The funding provided by the concessionaire
includes $140 million in private equity and $875 million as a loan through the
6

--- Page 9 ---
federal Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act, which provides
credit assistance for qualified projects of regional or national significance.
According to the agreement, MTA makes monthly progress payments to the
concessionaire during the 6-year design-build period, not-to-exceed $990 million.
These payments began in June 2016 for the cost of design-related work. The
concessionaire agreement also requires MTA to make monthly availability
payments (averaging $154 million annually) over the 30-year operating period.
These availability
payments, which vary Purple Line Expenditures
based on the service
As of July 2017
level provided, are
Category Expenditures
intended to cover
Concessionaire $243.4 million
repayment of the
Right-of-Way 79.5 million
concessionaire’s initial
Project Management Consultant 32.9 million
financing (including
General Engineering Consultant 10.1 million
debt service and a return
Miscellaneous 14 million
on equity investment),
Total (rounded) $380 million
operating and
Source: State accounting records
maintenance costs
(including insurance), and lifecycle costs (such as track replacement). MTA is
allowed to deduct up to 100 percent of the operating, maintenance, and capital
portions of the concessionaire’s availability payments for poor performance. As
of July 2017, MTA’s expenditures related to the Purple Line totaled
approximately $380 million as depicted in the table.
MDOT, in consultation with the Capital Debt Affordability Committee and the
Office of the Attorney General, determined that the payment structure of the
concessionaire agreement exhibited the same characteristics as non-tax debt and,
therefore, would have no impact on the State’s debt affordability measures.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 13, 2015. We determined that MTA
satisfactorily addressed seven of these findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the five findings that
were contained in our February 3, 2015 special report on MTA’s Interagency
Agreements with a State University. We determined that MTA satisfactorily
7

--- Page 10 ---
addressed three of these findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this
report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 1
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) used certain contracts as a
means to obtain services that were outside the scope of those contracts,
thereby circumventing competitive procurement requirements, and related
task orders lacked details of contract deliverables. In addition, increases in
hourly rates charged under these task orders were excessive based on MTA
guidelines.
Analysis
MTA used existing contracts to obtain services that were outside the scope of
those contracts, thereby circumventing competitive procurement requirements. In
addition, certain of these task orders lacked details of contract deliverables, and
hourly rate increases were excessive based on MTA guidelines for such contracts.
Approximately $590,000 was paid for these services under the three contracts in
question. We identified these deficiencies as a result of referrals to our fraud,
waste, and abuse hotline. Additional contract procurement and monitoring
deficiencies and certain questionable activities were identified as a result of other
referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The results of a separate special
review of these allegations will be reported in the near future.
Labor Negotiation Consulting Services
MTA used a management services contract to obtain labor negotiations consulting
services totaling $257,000 that were unrelated to the scope of the contract,
circumventing procurement regulations, and unnecessarily incurred additional
management fees totaling approximately $14,000. In addition, the task order used
for these consulting services lacked specific deliverables, and certain hourly rates
paid were excessive based on MTA guidelines. Finally, the selection of the
consultant based on the consultant’s lack of documented experience appears
questionable.
In July 2015, MTA procured the services of a labor negotiations consultant for a
period of 90 days in an amount not to exceed $25,000, and then extended the
contract through December 2015 for a total amount not to exceed $50,000.
MTA’s subsequent request to extend these services beyond December 2015 was
not approved by the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) which concluded that
it appeared there was a continuing need for these services and that a competitive
procurement should be pursued. The original contract was awarded as a sole
source procurement under provisions of State procurement regulations which
9

--- Page 12 ---
provide that, with the prior written approval of the OAG, an agency may enter
into a sole source contract to retain confidential services of a contractor to
represent the interests of the State in connection with collective bargaining. The
regulations also state that if an agency can reasonably anticipate a continuing need
for the services, a competitive procurement must be pursued.
Rather than conduct a competitive procurement after the contract’s conclusion in
December 2015, MTA included these labor negotiations consulting services, with
the same consultant, as a task order under a separate contract for unrelated
management services. In addition, the task order lacked specific deliverables for
monitoring the services provided, and the hourly rate for these services increased
31 percent from the original July 2015 contract. According to MTA’s Price
Proposal Guidelines for Cost Reimbursement Contracts, salary increases of up to
five percent a year are considered reasonable.
Furthermore, the documentation related to the selection of the consultant included
only an indication that MTA had identified an individual with the requisite skills;
however, the individual’s resume did not reference any experience in labor
negotiations. According to MTA’s records, approximately $271,000 was paid
under the aforementioned task order. Of this total, $257,000 was paid to the
consultant, and the prime contractor of the unrelated management services
contract received a project management fee totaling approximately $14,000, even
though this contractor performed no substantial oversight of services performed
by the consultant. The labor negotiations consulting task order was discontinued
in June 2017.
Employment of Support Staff
MTA improperly used two consecutive task orders under different architectural
and engineering contracts to hire an individual to perform unrelated duties, such
as general accounting, budget, and payroll related tasks during the period from
August 2014 through August 2017. These services were not consistent with the
scope of the architectural and engineering contracts which provided support
services related to capital improvement plans and consulting services for major
capital projects. The task orders were awarded by the two prime contractors to
approved subcontractors, which, in turn, hired this individual at the direction of
MTA. The subcontractors’ only involvement was to invoice the prime contractor
for the individual’s services, which then invoiced MTA for the services provided,
and to reimburse the individual for the hours worked.
These services appeared to be procured in this manner to circumvent competitive
procurement requirements provided for in State procurement regulations, or to
avoid using or seeking additional budgeted positions as necessary. Payments for
10

--- Page 13 ---
these two task orders totaled approximately $319,000 through May 2017,
including $129,000 in direct labor payments and $190,000 in fixed fee and
overhead payments to the subcontractors.
The first task order covered the period from August 2014 to August 2016. When
that task order expired, the individual’s services were moved to a new task order
under a different contract and subcontractor for the period from August 2016
through August 2017. During the three-year period covered by the two task
orders, the individual’s hourly rate increased by approximately 30 percent, which
was inconsistent with the aforementioned MTA Price Proposal Guidelines for
Cost Reimbursement Contracts that stipulate that salary increases of up to five
percent a year are considered reasonable.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. discontinue the practice of using existing contracts to circumvent
required competitive procurement processes or to avoid using or
requesting budgeted positions as necessary,
b. ensure that task orders specify required deliverables that can be used for
monitoring the services provided,
c. ensure that hourly rate increases are consistent with the aforementioned
MTA guidelines, and
d. ensure that adequate documentation exists to support the selection of
individuals who will provide consulting services.
Finding 2
MTA did not always adhere to State procurement regulations with respect to
sole source procurements, contract award requirements, and bid
documentation, and certain monitoring efforts were not adequate.
Analysis
MTA did not always adhere to State regulations with regard to sole source
procurements, bid receipt and opening procedures, and contract award publication
requirements. Certain procurements were not consolidated to maximize
purchasing power, and a significant service contract was not adequately
monitored.
Documentation Justifying Sole Source Procurements Was Inadequate
Sole source procurements were not always appropriately justified. Our test of 23
sole source procurements totaling $13.4 million disclosed that, for 10
procurements valued at approximately $2 million, MTA lacked sufficient
11

--- Page 14 ---
evidence to support the use of the sole source procurement method. For 6
procurements valued at $394,000 that were awarded to the same vendor, MTA
advised us that several vendors were contacted during the procurement process,
but no vendors, other than the winning vendor, could meet the required
specifications. However, MTA could not provide documentation that other
vendors were contacted. For the other 4 procurements totaling $1.6 million made
from two vendors, MTA could not provide appropriate documentation to support
the assertion that there was only one authorized vendor for the products purchased
(for example, bus transmissions).
State procurement regulations provide that a sole source procurement is not
permissible unless the goods or services are available from only a single vendor,
and require that written justifications be prepared and approved prior to contract
awards.
Bid Documentation for Certain Contracts Was Deficient and Contract Awards
Were Not Routinely Published on eMaryland Marketplace
Our test of five contract procurements totaling $206.8 million disclosed that, for
one contract valued at $36.8 million related to the overhaul of MTA’s Maryland
Rail Commuter Service fleet, there was no record of the bid opening to
substantiate that the bids were opened in the presence of two employees as
required. Furthermore, technical evaluations to support the award were not
signed by the individual evaluators. Additionally, for this contract and one
additional $13.5 million contract, MTA could not provide any documentation to
support that the bids were received by the submission deadlines.
MTA also did not routinely publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
(eMM) as required. MTA published 302 solicitations on eMM with bid opening
dates during the period between December 20, 2013 and May 19, 2016. Although
we could not readily determine if all 302 resulted in contract awards, we did
identify 160 contract solicitations for which an award had not been published on
eMM as of May 2017.
State regulations require bids be opened in the presence of two employees, that a
record be maintained of the date of receipt of contract bids, and that contract
awards greater than $25,000 be published on eMM not more than 30 days after the
execution and approval of the contract.
Contracts Were Not Always Established When Warranted
MTA repeatedly used corporate purchasing cards to procure bus repair services
and parts from two vendors without soliciting competitive bids and entering into
written contracts, as required. From December 2013 to December 2016, 1,550
12

--- Page 15 ---
payments were made to these two vendors totaling approximately $772,000 and
$649,000, respectively. Although the individual purchases were valued at $5,000
or less (which do not require formal competitive bids), combined purchases to
these vendors significantly exceeded these levels, and MTA’s leverage as a high-
volume purchaser may not have been maximized.
Monitoring Efforts for a Cleaning Contract Were Insufficient
MTA did not adequately monitor the contractor responsible for cleaning MTA’s
light rail vehicles (LRV). MTA procured a labor-hour contract, effective in May
2013, for the cleaning of LRVs. The total value of the contract, which expired in
September 2016, was approximately $6.1 million, which was paid in full. Under
the terms of the contract, the contractor was required to clean 46 LRV’s on a daily
basis, provide a specific level of staffing each day, and provide a daily checklist
of work completed. The contract further stated that invoicing would only be
accepted for actual work performed. However, our review disclosed that MTA
did not ensure that the contractor submitted the required documentation of hours
worked and tasks completed, and did not make payments based on actual labor
hours provided, as required. Rather, MTA treated the contract as a fixed-price
contract and paid the same monthly fixed fee of $154,177 regardless of the
number of hours worked, staffing levels provided, or the number of LRVs
cleaned.
Similar conditions relating to documenting sole source procurement justifications,
the receipt and processing of bids, and publishing contracts on eMM were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MTA comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that MTA
a. use the sole source procurement method only when a single vendor can
meet the requirements, and adequately document this justification
(repeat);
b. maintain adequate procurement documentation for bids, including the
date the bids were received (repeat), support that bids were opened by at
least two employees, and the corresponding signed technical evaluations;
c. publish contracts on eMM as required (repeat);
d. consolidate procurements of similar goods to maximize buying power;
and
e. monitor contracts to ensure that the required documentation of hours
worked and tasks completed is received and that payments are made only
for hours actually provided in accordance with contract terms.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 3
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of
purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Analysis
The security features available on the State’s Financial Management Information
System (FMIS) were not fully used by MTA to establish proper internal controls
over certain purchasing and disbursement transactions. Specifically, MTA had
not established adequate electronic approval paths over all critical purchasing and
disbursement transactions for 18 of its 25 departments.
Consequently, six employees could process critical transactions in departments
with inadequate or no approval paths. Specifically, five employees could initiate
and approve purchase orders and one employee could initiate and approve
disbursements in multiple departments, without independent approval. MTA did
not have any manual reviews over these critical transactions.
Although our testing did not disclose any improper disbursements, unauthorized
transactions could be processed, which may not be readily detected. During fiscal
year 2016, MTA used FMIS to process disbursements totaling approximately
$857.5 million. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA fully use available FMIS security controls by
establishing independent electronic approval requirements for all critical
purchasing and disbursement transactions (repeat).
Interagency Agreements
Background
Interagency agreements are used by State agencies to obtain services, such as
technical assistance, from State agencies, including institutions of higher
education. Interagency agreements are exempt from State procurement laws,
including the requirements for competitive procurement, publication of
solicitation and awards, and Board of Public Works’ approval.
MTA’s Office of Training and Development entered into interagency agreements
with three higher education institutions, two of which were community colleges,
to provide training courses and related services. Payments under these three
agreements for fiscal years 2013 to 2017 totaled approximately $7.1 million,
14

--- Page 17 ---
including fiscal year 2017 payments totaling $1.3 million. The three agreements,
which were renewed annually, provided for the institutions to develop and deliver
training to MTA personnel. The agreements varied in scope and duration and
covered a wide range of training topics, including computer skills, customer
service training, first responders training, and bus operator mentoring. Task
orders were to be prepared that further detailed the work to be performed and
related deliverables.
State budget law places requirements on State agencies to report certain
interagency agreement activity to the State’s Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) for its review and reporting to the General Assembly’s
budget committees. DBM’s written instructions to the agencies for reporting such
activity stipulate that agreements with certain types of higher education
institutions, such as the two aforementioned community colleges, are not subject
to the reporting requirements. Accordingly, there was no DBM review performed
of the agreements with these two colleges, which received $2.2 million in
payments during the aforementioned period.
In February 2015, we issued a report on our special review of MTA’s interagency
agreements with a State university. That report included several findings relating
to MTA’s use and monitoring of those agreements. Our current review of MTA’s
interagency agreements disclosed the following conditions:
Finding 4
MTA used interagency agreements primarily to circumvent State
procurement regulations that require competitive bidding.
MTA used the interagency agreements with two of the higher education
institutions (including one community college) to circumvent State procurement
regulations, which require a competitive procurement process. The primary
purpose of the interagency agreements was for these institutions to provide
training programs to MTA personnel. However, MTA directed both institutions
to enter into agreements with a private vendor to provide services that were
outside the scope of the interagency agreements. Specifically, the vendor, which
specialized in training program evaluation services, was directed to determine the
effectiveness of the various training courses provided to MTA employees.
The management of both institutions advised us that MTA directed them to the
specific vendor to be contracted for the services, and that the agreements with the
vendor were obtained without obtaining competitive bids. MTA management
confirmed that these services were not competitively procured, and that MTA
wanted to ensure that the aforementioned vendor provided the services. Our
15

--- Page 18 ---
review also disclosed that the institutions had minimal involvement in the work
performed by the vendor, other than to pay the vendor and bill MTA. We were
advised that the institutions’ billings to MTA included administrative fees that
ranged between 25 percent and 51 percent, with an accumulated cost for these
fees of approximately $529,000 over the term of the agreement.
MTA’s control of the selection, work duties, and oversight of the vendor raises
questions as to the propriety of MTA’s use of the interagency agreements rather
than competitively procuring the services as required by State procurement
regulations. Accordingly, assurance was lacking that these services were obtained
at the most advantageous cost to the State. A similar condition was commented
upon in our report on the aforementioned special review of MTA’s interagency
agreements with a State university. According to MTA’s records, expenditures
related to the task orders for the aforementioned vendor services, which began in
fiscal year 2012, totaled approximately $1.8 million through fiscal year 2017.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA discontinue its practice of using interagency
agreements to circumvent State procurement regulations (repeat).
Finding 5
MTA did not follow up on the results of a review conducted by its Office of
Audits regarding payments made to and deliverables required from a State
university under an interagency agreement. The review disclosed, for
example, approximately $725,000 in payments that should be recovered.
Analysis
MTA did not follow up on the results of a review conducted by its Office of
Audits regarding payments made to and deliverables required from a division
within a State university, relating to an interagency agreement for employment
services. In response to the recommendations made in our February 2015 report
of MTA’s interagency agreements with the university, the MTA’s Office of
Audits reviewed payments totaling approximately $10.7 million made to the
division during fiscal years 2010 through 2013. The objectives of the Office’s
review were to determine if amounts billed were in accordance with the terms of
the agreement and the related task orders, and to determine if all required
deliverables were provided based on supporting documentation.
The Office’s review disclosed that approximately $725,000 in payments were
duplicate payments, overpayments, or payments not specified in the agreement,
and should be recovered. For example, the report identified nine invoices that
16

--- Page 19 ---
included a 10 percent administrative fee that was not provided for in the related
agreement. The administrative fee component for these nine invoices totaled
$416,000.
The Office of Audits’ review also noted that MTA was unable to verify that
deliverables related to approximately $6.5 million in billings were actually
received. For example, the Office’s report identified approximately $5.7 million
in payments made to the university’s division during fiscal years 2010 through
2013 related to the employment services agreement that did not include
documentation (such as quarterly progress reports detailing the employees’
activities) to support the billings.
MTA’s Office of Audits completed its review on June 3, 2016, and its findings
were communicated to MTA management in March 2017. However, as of July
2017, MTA had not taken any action to pursue recovery of these funds. We were
advised by MTA management that it agreed with the findings but, as a result of
changes in personnel, no one was assigned to review or follow up on the findings.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MTA
a. follow up on the results of the review conducted by its Office of Audits
and determine what actions should be taken in consultation with legal
counsel; and
b. pursue recovery of the aforementioned amounts, as deemed appropriate.
Finding 6
Interagency agreements were not adequately monitored. Task orders were
not sufficiently detailed to allow for adequate monitoring by MTA, and
certain payments were not consistent with or were not provided for in the
related task orders.
Analysis
Interagency agreements were not adequately monitored. Task orders did not
provide sufficient detail to allow for adequate monitoring by MTA, and certain
payments were not consistent with or were not provided for in the related task
orders. Our review of 12 disbursements totaling $225,000 made during fiscal
year 2017 relating to 9 task orders under the agreements with the 3
aforementioned higher education institutions disclosed the following conditions
related to 6 task orders. Fiscal year 2017 payments related to the 9 task orders
totaled approximately $1.3 million.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 Four task orders valued at $755,000 lacked a comprehensive description of the
scope of work to be performed, which precluded effective monitoring.
Specifically, two task orders under one of the agreements required the
institution to provide personnel for development, support, and maintenance
functions related to MTA’s continuing education tracking database. Although
the task orders specified the individuals’ hourly rates, there was no scope of
work outlining the specific services to be performed, nor were there
deliverables that could be used to ensure the work was performed. In
addition, the two other task orders, which were for training courses, lacked
critical details such as instructor billing rates, the specific number of courses
to be taught, and the course subject area. For example, one institution was to
provide a full-time instructor at an annual cost of $128,400 to conduct
classroom training, but the task order did not specify the number of courses to
be taught or the subject matter the courses were to cover.
 Six of the 12 disbursements totaling $57,000 included $53,000 in charges that
were not authorized in the related task orders, or were not adequately
supported. For example, one $30,000 invoice for various customer service
training courses included a charge of $10,100 for a project manager’s monthly
salary which was not provided for in the task order, and there was no
documentation provided to support a $2,700 charge for printing and catering
costs. Furthermore, the invoice charged different rates for two instructors
teaching the same courses, with rates billed of $161 and $247 per hour. While
we were advised by the institution that the rates depended on the instructor’s
experience level, the task order did not specify the instructor rates nor provide
for different rates based upon the instructor’s experience.
Similar conditions related to the lack of effective monitoring of agreements and
verification of amounts billed were commented upon in our 2015 special review
of MTA’s interagency agreements with a State University.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that interagency agreements and task orders contain sufficient
details to enable effective monitoring,
b. ensure amounts paid under interagency agreements are authorized in the
related task orders (repeat), and
c. ensure adequate documentation is obtained to enable verification of
amounts invoiced (repeat).
18

--- Page 21 ---
Mobility Paratransit Program
Finding 7
MTA lacked adequate controls to ensure that only eligible individuals
received Mobility Paratransit Program (MPP) services.
Analysis
MTA lacked adequate procedures and controls to ensure that determinations made
of an individual’s eligibility for MPP services were proper, and that photo
identification (ID) cards necessary to use MPP services were generated only for
individuals who were determined to be eligible. MTA awarded contracts to three
vendors in February 2013 to provide MPP services and, as of August 2018,
payments to these vendors totaled approximately $354.6 million. Payments to
these vendors during fiscal year 2017 totaled approximately $76 million.
MTA’s MPP is a federally mandated program that provides door-to-door
transportation services for individuals with disabilities who are unable to ride
fixed-route public transportation, such as the subway or an established bus route.
Each program applicant is interviewed by an MTA eligibility specialist who is
responsible for reviewing supporting documentation signed by the applicant’s
health care professional attesting to the disability, and for determining if the
applicant is eligible. Individuals determined to be eligible are designated as
unconditionally eligible (full time access to MPP), conditionally eligible (access
is restricted, such as night only), or temporarily eligible (access for a specified
period).
 MTA did not conduct supervisory reviews of applicants approved for
unconditional eligibility to ensure that eligibility specialists had made the
proper determinations. Rather, supervisory reviews were only performed for
applicants determined to be temporarily or conditionally eligible, and for
applicants determined to be ineligible for MPP service. The reason provided
by MTA was that applicants determined to be unconditionally eligible had no
reason to appeal MTA’s determination. However, this approach did not
consider the State’s interest and the impact of potentially giving applicants
undeserved eligibility. As of March 31, 2017, according to MTA’s records,
21,624 of the 24,624 program participants (87 percent) were determined to be
unconditionally eligible for MPP services. To ensure that eligibility
determinations are valid, all determinations should be subject to supervisory
review.
 Two employees with access to create new MPP clients in MTA’s automated
eligibility database could also generate new ID cards without independent
19

--- Page 22 ---
review and approval. In addition, MTA lacked a process to independently
verify that ID cards were generated only for individuals who were determined
to be eligible for MPP service. In this regard, MTA did not periodically
account for ID cards as distributed to an eligible applicant, returned as unused,
or remaining on hand. Under these conditions, errors or other discrepancies
could occur without detection.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that the supervisory review of MPP applicants includes, at least on
a test basis, applicants determined to be unconditionally eligible for MPP
services;
b. ensure that employees who have access to establish new clients on the
eligibility database do not have access to generate ID cards; and
c. establish an independent review process to ensure that all ID cards
are properly issued and accounted for.
Union Payroll and Pensions
Background
MTA is responsible for all aspects of its union payroll and pensions, including
tracking employee pay rates and hours worked, maintaining pension and leave
records, posting adjustments to the pension and payroll records, and processing
weekly payments via check or direct deposit. MTA maintains collectively
bargained labor agreements with each of its three labor unions, which set forth
employment terms for these employees (including wages and pension benefit
calculations). During calendar year 2017, union payroll and pension expenditures
totaled approximately $216.8 million, consisting of union payroll expenditures of
$177.3 million and pension expenditures of $39.5 million. See table on the
following page. MTA police officers participate in the Law Enforcement
Officers’ Pension System, which is administered by the Maryland State
Retirement Agency.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Union Payroll and Pension Expenditures
Calendar Year 2017
Number of
Labor Union Expenditures
Employees
Local 1300-Bus and Rail Operators
2,449 $157.8 million
and Maintenance Employees
Local 1859-MTA Police 208 12.6 million
Local 2-Clerical Support Employees 188 6.9 million
Pensions (Local 2 & Local 1300) 2,272 39.5 million
Total 5,117 $216.8 million
Source: State accounting records
Finding 8
MTA had not established adequate controls over its union payroll and
pension processes. All payroll department employees had capabilities
granting them complete control over payroll transactions.
Analysis
MTA had not established adequate controls over its union payroll and pension
processes. All payroll department employees had capabilities that granted them
complete control over payroll and pension transactions, and supervisory reviews
intended to ensure the propriety of critical transactions were not sufficient.
Additionally, terminated employees were not always removed from the payroll
system on a timely basis.
 All six employees in MTA’s payroll department were granted access
capabilities in the automated payroll system that gave them virtually complete
control over the payroll and pension processes, allowing improper or
erroneous transactions to be processed without detection. Specifically, for
both union payroll and pension payroll, these employees had the capability to
establish employees on the payroll system, enter and change employee
salaries or pension amounts, enter time and attendance information, and
prepare checks and direct deposits without independent approval.
While supervisory reviews of certain critical payroll transactions (such as
regular payroll payments and manual checks processed to correct errors) were
performed, these reviews were conducted by two of the aforementioned six
21

--- Page 24 ---
employees and, therefore, were not independent. Furthermore, available
reports of other critical transactions, such as new employees added to the
payroll, were not produced for review. While our limited testing did not
disclose any significant errors or irregularities, these conditions provide an
environment in which MTA lacks assurance that all transactions processed are
proper.
MTA advised that it is procuring a new payroll system which will have the
capability of assigning security levels that will ensure proper controls for each
job duty.
 On a monthly basis, MTA calculated the expected total pension payment
amounts based on any changes to the pension master file made during the
month. However, MTA did not compare this calculated amount to the actual
pension expenditures to ensure agreement and to provide an opportunity to
investigate any significant variances. Our review of monthly pension
expenditures for calendar year 2016 disclosed that actual expenditures
exceeded expected amounts in 11 of 12 months. MTA had not identified nor
investigated these discrepancies, and MTA could not provide an explanation
for these variances when we brought them to management’s attention. For
example, actual pension expenditures in March 2016 ($3.2 million) exceeded
the expected amounts ($2.8 million) by approximately $400,000. Total
pension expenditures during calendar year 2016 ($36.1 million) exceeded
MTA’s expected amounts ($34.4 million) by approximately $1.7 million.
 Terminated union employees were not always removed from the payroll
system on a timely basis, and certain employees appear to have received
payments not due to them after their termination dates. Our review of union
employees terminated during calendar years 2014 through 2016 disclosed that
104 of the 233 employees (45 percent) terminated during this period were not
removed from MTA’s payroll records for at least 1 month after their
employment ended, including 24 employees who remained active in MTA’s
payroll records for 6 to 26 months after termination. However, our review of
the 10 employees who remained on MTA’s payroll system for the longest
duration after termination disclosed that two employees who remained on the
system for 14 and 26 months, respectively, received payments totaling $2,795
that appeared to be erroneous. MTA could not provide an explanation or
supporting documentation for these payments.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MTA
a. assign capabilities in its new payroll system such that employees cannot
unilaterally process critical transactions, such as those mentioned above;
b. ensure that supervisory personnel who are independent of the payroll
process use available system output reports to verify the propriety of
critical payroll transactions;
c. compare its monthly calculation of expected pension payments to actual
expenditures, investigate and resolve significant variances identified, and
provide for independent supervisory review and approval;
d. establish a process that ensures terminated employees are immediately
removed from the payroll system; and
e. perform a review of terminated employees, including the employees we
noted in our review, to determine if employees were improperly paid
after their termination date, and take appropriate action to recover any
improper payments.
Cash Receipts
Finding 9
MTA did not adequately control and account for collections received at its
Consignment Center and Transit Store, and bus fare collections were not
always deposited timely.
Analysis
MTA did not adequately control and account for collections received at its
Consignment Center and Transit Store, and bus fare collections were not always
deposited timely. MTA operates a Consignment Center and Transit Store at its
headquarters in Baltimore City where cash, check, and credit card payments are
also accepted for various fare passes and tickets, for example. Additionally, MTA
collects cash and credit card passenger fares through ticket vending machines for
light rail and Metro subway, and collects bus fares through on-board fare boxes.
During fiscal year 2016, Consignment Center and Transit store collections totaled
approximately $13.3 million, including $3.8 million in credit card collections;
cash collections related to the bus, light rail, and Metro subway totaled
approximately $45.8 million, including $32.3 million in bus fare collections; and
ticket vending machine credit card collections totaled $9.1 million.
 MTA did not verify Consignment Center and Transit Store collections
(including credit card receipts) from the initial record of receipt to amounts
deposited in its bank account. Rather, MTA compared credit card collections
23

--- Page 26 ---
as reported by its bank against recordation in the State’s accounting records.
For cash and check receipts, a secondary log, prepared by the Finance Office
was used in the verification process. Since the initial record of receipts was
not compared to amounts deposited, there was a lack of assurance that all
collections were properly deposited.
 Consignment Center check collections were not immediately restrictively
endorsed upon receipt and were not adequately safeguarded. Although checks
received at the Consignment Center were recorded in a tracking log
immediately upon receipt, they were not restrictively endorsed at that time.
Rather, checks were forwarded to a second employee and were left unsecured
on that employee’s desk until late afternoon, at which time they were
restrictively endorsed, recorded on a secondary check log (which was
subsequently used for deposit verification as noted above), prepared for
deposit, and then placed in a safe awaiting pick-up.
 MTA did not deposit bus fare collections in a timely fashion. Our test of bus
fare collections totaling approximately $990,000 received on 8 days during
the period from October 2015 to June 2016 disclosed that collections totaling
approximately $861,000 were deposited between 4 and 20 business days after
receipt.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires an
independent verification of collections from the initial point of recordation to
deposit. In addition, agencies are required to restrictively endorse checks
immediately upon receipt. The Manual also requires that collections totaling
$5,000 or more be deposited the first working day after receipt.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MTA
a. verify deposits by comparing validated deposit documentation from the
bank, including for credit card receipts, to the initial record of
collections;
b. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt, and safeguarded
collections while awaiting deposit; and
c. ensure that bus fare collections are deposited timely.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Equipment
Finding 10
MTA did not ensure that all equipment purchases were properly recorded in
its detailed equipment records.
Analysis
MTA did not ensure that all equipment purchases were properly recorded in its
detailed equipment records. According to MTA’s records, its equipment
inventory totaled approximately $314 million as of December 31, 2016
(excluding rolling stock such as buses and rail cars). Our test of 40 equipment
items totaling approximately $205,000 that were purchased during our audit
period disclosed that 27 items totaling approximately $150,000 (ranging in cost
from $330 to $58,600) had not been recorded in MTA’s detailed equipment
records as of February 2017. These unrecorded items included sensitive
equipment items such as wireless radios, cameras, and tablets, and included 11 of
the 12 items tested that had been purchased with corporate purchasing cards.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that equipment detail records be
properly maintained on a current basis, and that capital and sensitive equipment
be recorded in the detail records.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MTA ensure that equipment acquisitions are properly
recorded in the detailed equipment records in accordance with the
Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 11
Malware protection for MTA’s computers was not sufficient to provide the
MTA with adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Analysis
Malware protection for MTA’s 2,266 computers was not sufficient to provide
MTA with adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected. Using
a separate management console, the Maryland Department of Transportation
(MDOT) – Office of Transportation Technology Services (OTTS) managed the
malware protection software installed on MTA computers. MTA maintained its
computers in order to update installed operating system software and software
products having ongoing security vulnerabilities.
25

--- Page 28 ---
 Our April 3, 2017 test of 10 MTA workstations and 2 servers disclosed that 2
workstations did not have any malware protection software installed and the
remaining 8 workstations and 2 servers had outdated versions of the installed
malware protection software. We also noted that on 3 of the 8 workstations
tested (with installed malware protection software), that the malware
signatures (which are used to identify malware) were at least 334 days older
that the current signatures. The malware protection software vendor updates
these signatures every day and should be installed immediately. Finally, users
on 2 of the 10 workstations tested unnecessarily had the ability to disable the
malware protection software installed on their computers.
 Four of the aforementioned 10 workstations tested had not been updated with
the latest releases for software products that are known to have significant
security-related vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software
products frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities,
these workstations had not been updated for these patches.
 Thirty seven computers (17 servers and 20 workstations) were running
outdated operating systems which were no longer supported by the operating
system developer. Developer support for these computers ended by 2015 and
since then updates for this software to address newly discovered
vulnerabilities have not been provided.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy, states that agencies, at a
minimum, must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by
implementing protections (anti-virus, anti-malware) that, to the extent possible,
include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MTA
a. in conjunction with MDOT – OTTS, ensure all computers have client
malware protection software installed with current malware signatures,
and with settings on the client malware protection software preventing
users from disabling the malware protection software;
b. ensure all workstations are kept up-to-date for critical security-related
updates to potentially vulnerable installed software; and
c. ensure all computers operate with current and vendor supported versions
of operating system software.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) for the period
beginning December 16, 2013 and ending December 22, 2016. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MTA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurement and disbursements for
capital projects and operating expenditures, payroll, federal Mobility/Paratransit
and Reduced Fare programs, state grants, federal funds, equipment, and
information systems security. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in MTA’s preceding audit report. Finally, we determined the status of
the findings contained in our February 3, 2015 special report on MTA’s
Interagency Agreements with a State University.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided to
MTA by the State Highway Administration, through October 2016, for its non-
union management payroll. These support services are included within the scope
of our audit of the State Highway Administration. Beginning in November 2016
these support services were provided by Maryland Department of Transportation
– Secretary’s Office, and will be included within the scope of our audit of that
Office.
Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance
with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MTA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MTA.
27

--- Page 30 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MTA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and the Maryland Department of
Transportation’s Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and
expenditure data) and from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as
part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits
and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that
the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes
the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MTA’s union payroll and pension systems for the
purpose of testing payroll and pension transactions. We performed various tests
of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MTA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
28

--- Page 31 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MTA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MTA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Maryland Department of Transportation, on behalf of
MTA, to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results
of our review of its response.
29

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Period December 16, 2013 to December 22, 2016
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 1
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) used certain contracts as a means to obtain
services that were outside the scope of those contracts, thereby circumventing competitive
procurement requirements, and related task orders lacked details of contract deliverables.
In addition, increases in hourly rates charged under these task orders were excessive based
on MTA guidelines.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. discontinue the practice of using existing contracts to circumvent required competitive
procurement processes or to avoid using or requesting budgeted positions as necessary,
b. ensure that task orders specify required deliverables that can be used for monitoring
the services provided,
c. ensure that hourly rate increases are consistent with the aforementioned MTA
guidelines, and
d. ensure that adequate documentation exists to support the selection of individuals who
will provide consulting services.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Although the original procurement and
modification noted for the labor negotiation services contract was completed according to
State procurement guidelines, the task order awarded at the end of the original contract was
not properly reviewed and managed. The labor negotiation services contract task order was
terminated on June 7, 2017. As of July 7, 2018, the support staff individual cited has been
removed from the unrelated architectural and engineering contract.
The MDOT MTA has reviewed the relevant contracts to ensure that current consultant
services are being provided within the scope of the respective contract. Beginning in June
2018, the MDOT MTA Office of Procurement participates on the Task Order Review
Committee to help ensure that the proposed tasks are within the scope of the contract.

--- Page 34 ---
The process has been changed so that proposed task orders now require the Office of
Procurement approval in order to be awarded. Standard operating procedures will be updated
by January 31, 2019.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA will ensure that
contract managers include deliverables in all Task Orders. The MDOT MTA Office of
Procurement has awarded a contract to develop and execute a contract management
curriculum, which will include task order development. Training is expected to begin early
2019 and curriculum materials will be maintained to conduct future contract management
training. MDOT is also planning to develop and offer contract management training
departmentwide during 2019 and the MDOT MTA will be able to participate. During its
review of all task orders, the Task Order Review Committee will verify that task orders
deliverables are included in all task orders.
c. The MDOT MTA partially concurs with the recommendation. The referenced MTA Price
Proposal Guideline limits salary escalations to 5% annually and applies during a contract’s
period of performance. It is not intended to be used for comparison between two different
contracts. The contract noted was moved to a service contract that had a negotiated rate for
labor categories that were higher than the previous contract rate.
The MDOT MTA agrees that a justification for the 30% increase is lacking. Justification of
salary increases will be documented in the firm’s payroll roster and submitted for approval
with the monthly invoice. Approval of the invoice will also constitute approval of the payroll
roster. When applicable, the justification will also include an explanation of increases over
5%. The MDOT MTA will review and pay contractors according to the negotiated rates in
the new contract.
d. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Consultants must submit a scope of
work to the project manager to be approved prior to a task order being issued. This scope
includes the qualifications of the individuals to work on the task and should be coordinated
with the task manager. Upon the task manager’s approval, the task order, along with a
justification detailing the consultant selected, will be submitted to the Task Order Review
Committee for final approval.
Finding 2
MTA did not always adhere to State procurement regulations with respect to sole source
procurements, contract award requirements, and bid documentation, and certain
monitoring efforts were not adequate.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MTA comply with State procurement regulations. Specifically, we
recommend that MTA
a. use the sole source procurement method only when a single vendor can meet the
requirements, and adequately document this justification (repeat);

--- Page 35 ---
b. maintain adequate procurement documentation for bids, including the date the bids
were received (repeat), support that bids were opened by at least two employees, and
the corresponding signed technical evaluations;
c. publish contracts on eMM as required (repeat);
d. consolidate procurements of similar goods to maximize buying power; and
e. monitor contracts to ensure that the required documentation of hours worked and tasks
completed is received and that payments are made only for hours actually provided in
accordance with contract terms.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation but not some of the findings. In the
procurements cited by OLA, the MDOT MTA determined and documented that sole source
procurements were justified based on the need to use the original equipment manufacturer
(OEM) or their selected designee for the purchase of certain parts and services in order to
maintain the safety, performance, and warranty of critical systems, or that there was only one
supplier available for the product specified.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Having recognized this issue prior to
the OLA Audit, the MDOT MTA management disclosed this issue to OLA and had already
taken the initiative to standardize procurement documentation and ensure compliance.
Training was conducted with procurement staff personnel regarding the appropriate process
and documentation requirements for procurement and contract files. A bid receipt form was
created and implemented. All bids are date-and time-stamped, and the bid receipt form is a
permanent record in the file. Bid openings are witnessed by two MDOT MTA employees
and the signed form becomes a permanent record of the procurement file. All technical
evaluations are signed by the evaluators.
For all procurements initiated on or after May 1, 2018, the appropriate process will be
followed, and all documentation will be maintained in the procurement file. The
Procurement File Folder Checklist was developed to assist Procurement Officers to ensure
that required documentation is in the file. A Quality Assurance/Quality Control Manager
position has been created and is tasked to complete a random sample of MDOT MTA
procurements to verify compliance.
c. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Procurement officer training has
emphasized the requirement to publish awards on eMM. For procurements initiated on or
after May 1, 2018, a checklist has been developed and includes an acknowledgement that all
awards will be published on eMM as required. A Quality Assurance/Quality Control
Manager position was created and is tasked to complete a random sample of MDOT MTA
procurements to verify compliance.
d. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA recognized that
prior to the OLA audit, existing parts contracts had been eliminated under previous
management. MDOT MTA management disclosed this issue to OLA and had taken the

--- Page 36 ---
initiative to procure new parts contracts. Specifically, for the suppliers identified, the MDOT
MTA currently has an Invitation For Bid (IFB) issued for bus clutch and transmission
replacement parts. Further, two contracts have already been awarded for engines and engine
parts, and a number of other parts contracts are in various stages of work. The MDOT MTA
will continue to create contracts to leverage the market while making sure minority business
enterprises and small businesses get an opportunity to participate.
e. The MDOT MTA concurs with the auditor's recommendation. The MDOT MTA no longer
pays the Light Rail Vehicles (LRV) cleaning contractor based on number of hours worked.
The contract that went into effect September 2016 is based on the number of vehicles cleaned
that pass inspection up to a maximum of 36 LRVs per day per the contract. Following the
execution of the new contract in September 2016, the MDOT MTA Light Rail division hired
a full-time employee specifically assigned to perform nightly inspections of LRVs cleaned by
the vendor. The inspection process allows for the vendor to cure any deficiencies noted on
the initial inspection prior to failing the LRV inspection and deducting payment. This
process is documented nightly and the records are submitted to the vendor as well as stored at
the Light Rail division. These records are referenced by the Light Rail staff assigned to
approve monthly invoice payments.
The MDOT MTA Office of Procurement has awarded a contract to develop and execute a
contract management curriculum. Training is expected to begin early 2019 and curriculum
materials will be maintained to conduct future contract management training. MDOT is also
developing a departmentwide contract management training curriculum which is expected to
be rolled out in 2019 and the MDOT MTA can participate.
Finding 3
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of purchasing and
disbursement transactions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA fully use available FMIS security controls by establishing
independent electronic approval requirements for all critical purchasing and disbursement
transactions (repeat).
Response:
The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation and has taken appropriate measures to
ensure that proper FMIS security controls are in place for all purchasing and disbursement
transactions. The MDOT MTA worked with MDOT’s FMIS unit to review all MDOT MTA
departments for approval path deficiencies and add or enhance approval paths to meet
specifications. The MDOT MTA reviewed the six employees identified as having inadequate
approval paths and as of April 13, 2018, changes were made to their access and/or approval paths
were updated to rectify the issues.

--- Page 37 ---
Interagency Agreements
Finding 4
MTA used interagency agreements primarily to circumvent State procurement regulations
that require competitive bidding.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA discontinue its practice of using interagency agreements to
circumvent State procurement regulations (repeat).
Response:
The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Currently, the MDOT MTA does not have
any active interagency agreements for educational/training services and will not utilize
interagency agreements going forward. The MDOT MTA will work with the Office of
Procurement to ensure any services needed from outside vendors are procured according to State
Procurement Regulations and all tasks are within the scope of service.
Finding 5
MTA did not follow up on the results of a review conducted by its Office of Audits
regarding payments made to and deliverables required from a State university under an
interagency agreement. The review disclosed, for example, approximately $725,000 in
payments that should be recovered.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MTA
a. follow up on the results of the review conducted by its Office of Audits and determine
what actions should be taken in consultation with legal counsel; and
b. pursue recovery of the aforementioned amounts, as deemed appropriate.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA, after the recommended consultation with the Office of Legal Counsel and
senior management of MDOT MTA and MDOT, made the decision to decline pursuit of
recovery. Though we recognize supporting documentation was lacking, MDOT MTA
received the work products as agreed upon from the State university and MDOT MTA
maintains an ongoing working relationship with this fellow State agency.
b. Same response as above.

--- Page 38 ---
Finding 6
Interagency agreements were not adequately monitored. Task orders were not sufficiently
detailed to allow for adequate monitoring by MTA, and certain payments were not
consistent with or were not provided for in the related task orders.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that interagency agreements and task orders contain sufficient details to enable
effective monitoring,
b. ensure amounts paid under interagency agreements are authorized in the related task
orders (repeat), and
c. ensure adequate documentation is obtained to enable verification of amounts invoiced
(repeat).
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA has ceased the use
of Interagency Agreements. The Office of Training and Development has been working with
the Office of Procurement to procure a contract management subject matter expert to provide
training to the MDOT MTA personnel. The MDOT MTA anticipates this training to begin in
early 2019. The contract management training will teach such things as: the business case,
the scope of work, contract management strategy, desired end results, and management of
scope compliance and/or appropriate scope changes.
b. Same response as above.
c. Same response as above.
Mobility Paratransit Program
Finding 7
MTA lacked adequate controls to ensure that only eligible individuals received Mobility
Paratransit Program (MPP) services.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that the supervisory review of MPP applicants includes, at least on a test basis,
applicants determined to be unconditionally eligible for MPP services;
b. ensure that employees who have access to establish new clients on the eligibility
database do not have access to generate ID cards; and
c. establish an independent review process to ensure that all ID cards
are properly issued and accounted for.

--- Page 39 ---
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Unconditional determination reviews
began in the fall of 2017 and continue on a quarterly basis. Over the last year training
sessions have been developed around findings of the unconditional review. The file review
is selected by the manager on a test basis and ensures all staff responsible for processing
MPP applications are reviewed. The manager documents the review and follows-up with the
Eligibility Specialist responsible for that application as needed. The analysis last measured
the MTA approval rate of unconditionally eligible applicants at 87%. The rate has reduced to
78.6% as measured year to date January to October 2018.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Former employees having access to
both systems have been removed from the user lists. The Mobility Department began using
pre-numbered card stock on May 1, 2018, and there is no old stock remaining. The use of
pre-numbered card stock will strengthen controls over the issuance of cards and facilitate the
reconciliation to card numbers in Trapeze. An exception report has been created to show
when a new applicant file is created by someone other than a Customer Service
Representative. All IDs printed are recorded on a daily log with the card stock number. All
numbers from the pre-numbered card stock are monitored to ensure quality control. The ID
card system does not have the capability to grant “read-only” access. The Eligibility
Manager and Supervisor must have access to both systems to supervise these functions and
reconcile the data between systems. Since May 2018, the MTA Mobility Contract
Compliance Officer generates a card issue report daily from the Episuite and compares it to
the eligibility determinations in Trapeze by the MTA Mobility employee for the Manager
and Supervisor.
c. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendations. On May 1, 2018, the Mobility
Department began using pre-numbered card stock. The Eligibility Supervisor performs a
reconciliation of all ID cards issued with the camera operator on a weekly basis. An
exception report has been created to show when a new applicant file is created by someone
other than a Customer Service Representative. All IDs printed are recorded on a daily log
with the card stock number. All numbers from the pre-numbered card stock are monitored to
ensure quality control. Since May 2018, the MTA Mobility Contract Compliance Officer
generates a card issue report daily from the Episuite and compares it to the eligibility
determinations in Trapeze by MTA Mobility employee for the Manager and Supervisor.
Union Payroll and Pensions
Finding 8
MTA had not established adequate controls over its union payroll and pension processes.
All payroll department employees had capabilities granting them complete control over
payroll transactions.

--- Page 40 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MTA
a. assign capabilities in its new payroll system such that employees cannot unilaterally
process critical transactions, such as those mentioned above;
b. ensure that supervisory personnel who are independent of the payroll process use
available system output reports to verify the propriety of critical payroll transactions;
c. compare its monthly calculation of expected pension payments to actual expenditures,
investigate and resolve significant variances identified, and provide for independent
supervisory review and approval;
d. establish a process that ensures terminated employees are immediately removed from
the payroll system; and
e. perform a review of terminated employees, including the employees we noted in our
review, to determine if employees were improperly paid after their termination date,
and take appropriate action to recover any improper payments.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA is currently working
to replace MDOT MTA’s existing payroll system with a state-of-the-art cloud-based system
that will have the capability of assigning security levels that will ensure proper controls for
each job duty. The new system is set to be fully operational in the first quarter of calendar
year 2019.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Effective April 2018, a weekly report
has been created that details each user’s access capabilities and daily transactions for review
by the Payroll Manager. For any adjustments needed, the Payroll Manager notifies the IT
Department to take the appropriate action. The Payroll Manager signs the weekly report and
notes that all changes have been corrected.
c. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The current procedure has been
modified as of March 1, 2018, to ensure that all modifications to the pension master file are
independently reviewed by Payroll and all variances between the expected pension payments
and actual payments are resolved. The monthly changes are determined by the Human
Resources Benefits Section and are entered into the payroll system by Human Resources.
Payroll enters the changes in the tracking sheet and deducts or adds to the previous month’s
balance to arrive at an expected expenditure. Payroll will compare the expected payments to
actual payments and review with the Benefits Section to ensure appropriate action is taken
for resolution and balancing.
d. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The new payroll system will have the
capability of processing the termination electronically with the proper security levels to
ensure that the individual is removed timely. The new system is set to be fully operational
in the first quarter of calendar year 2019. In the meantime, as of May 23, 2018, a weekly
report is generated that lists all employees in a no pay status for review and appropriate
action to ensure inactive employees are not receiving pay. Follow-up calls are made to area
managers to determine if they are no longer with the MDOT MTA or are out of service.
e. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA has initiated a
review of terminated employees beginning April 1, 2018, to determine if employees were

--- Page 41 ---
paid after their termination date and take appropriate corrective action to recover any
improper payments, including the improper payments identified in the auditor’s examination.
The report noted in item (d) will be used, along with confirmation from the supervisor, to
determine whether there are overpayments and make the necessary corrections and
recoveries.
Cash Receipts
Finding 9
MTA did not adequately control and account for collections received at its Consignment
Center and Transit Store, and bus fare collections were not always deposited timely.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MTA
a. verify deposits by comparing validated deposit documentation from the bank, including
for credit card receipts, to the initial record of collections;
b. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt, and safeguarded collections
while awaiting deposit; and
c. ensure that bus fare collections are deposited timely.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The initial record of collections from
the Consignment Center is verified by the independent employee in Treasury and signed off
on as verified. To ensure proper verification, the Accounts Receivable Specialist in
Accounting will provide a copy of the daily bank deposit slip to attach to the initial record for
supporting documentation. The Accounts Receivable Specialist in Accounting will verify the
deposit to the monthly bank statement and sign off as verified.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Transit store cashiers and others
receiving payments are instructed to restrictively endorse all checks immediately upon
receipt. Collections required to be processed by a second employee will be held and
controlled in a secured area until ready to be processed for deposit. Cash handling
procedures will be updated by December 31, 2018 to reflect this requirement.
c. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation and has taken appropriate measures to
clear the backlog of receipts observed during the auditor's examination. The appropriate
measures include adding staff, establishing volume standards, and coordinating
collection/delivery timing to additional staffing, establishing production volume standards for
sorting, coordinated collection/delivery timing to ensure deposits are made the next business
day after receipt at the counting facility. Additional resources were brought in to support
catching up on the daily deposits. Since July 3, 2016, receipts have been counted the day
received at the revenue control center and deposited the next business day. The deposit
timing is monitored to identify any delays so appropriate action can be taken. Treasury
Administration tracks the Daily Cash Deposit summary sheet to ensure compliance.

--- Page 42 ---
Equipment
Finding 10
MTA did not ensure that all equipment purchases were properly recorded in its detailed
equipment records.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MTA ensure that equipment acquisitions are properly recorded in the
detailed equipment records in accordance with the Department of General Services’
Inventory Control Manual.
Response:
The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. As of July 2018, the Accounts Payable
Specialists have been trained and all fixed asset invoices are now being provided to the Fixed
Assets Department for proper recording into FMIS timely. The items identified as not recorded,
have also been entered into FMIS. A process has been initiated where the Accounts Payable
Specialists will identify in FMIS when a fixed asset is purchased at the time of processing the
invoice. This process will capture the fixed asset in FMIS in screen 73A, entitled “Fixed Asset
Property Record Suspense”, for the Fixed Asset Section to enter final information needed to
initiate the tagging and final recording of the asset.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 11
Malware protection for MTA’s computers was not sufficient to provide the MTA with
adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MTA
a. in conjunction with MDOT – OTTS, ensure all computers have client malware
protection software installed with current malware signatures, and with settings on the
client malware protection software preventing users from disabling the malware
protection software;
b. ensure all workstations are kept up-to-date for critical security-related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software; and
c. ensure all computers operate with current and vendor supported versions of operating
system software.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Since February 2018, MDOT’s Office
of Transportation Technology Services (OTTS) generates a weekly report of outdated

--- Page 43 ---
workstations that is being reviewed by the MDOT MTA IT Department. The MDOT MTA
System Administrators are coordinating with MDOT OTTS and end-users to update all
outdated workstations with current malware software including current signatures and ensure
malware protection software cannot be disabled.
b. The MDOT MTA partially concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA utilizes
legacy software that supports multiple business-critical applications; therefore, the MDOT
MTA is working diligently to ensure all machines are up-to-date without detrimentally
affecting the operating environment. Updates and update verifications for our computers’
operating system software occur on a nightly basis as a scheduled task.
c. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Since the conclusion of the audit, the
number of outdated machines has been reduced and the MDOT MTA will continue to
remove identified outdated systems moving forward. All of the systems noted that remain on
the network that run unsupported software are currently engaged in large-scale procurements
to be replaced between 2019 and 2020.

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Senior Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Thea A. Chimento
Marc E. Merius
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA, CFE
Larry M. Richardson
Tu N. Vuong
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors