Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City, Maryland - Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and Policies Involving an Office Management Employee
Date: 2025-07-24
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6887e8b6fa239565c1d97141
Extracted: 2025-09-11T16:12:12.652339
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Office of the Register of Wills
Baltimore City, Maryland
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving an Office Management Employee
July 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 24, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review of a referral received through our fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline regarding the Office of the Register of Wills for Baltimore City,
Maryland. The allegations related to possible violations of State laws,
regulations, and policies including questionable procurement and payroll practices
involving an Office management employee that had been occurring since at least
2017. Our review did not identify any matters that warranted referral to the
Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division, but did identify matters that
we referred to the State Ethics Commission as well as deficiencies with
procedures and controls over procurement and human resource activities.
Specifically, our review disclosed that the Office did not consolidate multiple
procurements from the same vendors, circumventing competitive procurement
and approval requirements. For example, during fiscal year 2019, the Office
made 23 payments totaling $66,100 to one vendor for media production services,
with each payment less than $5,000, which was the threshold requiring
competitive procurements. By not consolidating these procurements, the Office
was able to select vendors to provide these goods and services without conducting
competitive procurements and obtaining certain approvals.
Our review also disclosed that the Office could not provide documentation to
justify approximately $1.1 million spent on media and promotional items which
was significantly higher than other Registers of Wills we reviewed. For example,
the Office paid $197,000 to produce an informational television series without
evaluating public interest in the show which was ultimately never aired. In
addition, the Office spent funds on promotional items such as manicure sets
which did not include the name of the Office or any contact information raising
questions as to whether the purchases were justified.

--- Page 4 ---
Our review further disclosed that the hiring and ongoing employment of one
employee appeared questionable and potentially violated State ethics law.
Specifically, the Office did not have critical documentation, such as an
employment application and a position description, to support the hiring of the
employee. Additionally, the employee founded and operated a company that
provided professional services to the management employee who directly hired
the employee. This condition could also potentially violate State ethics law,
which prohibits an employee from having any other employment relationship that
would impair the impartiality and independent judgment of the employee.
Finally, our review disclosed that the Office improperly paid one employee for
205 hours of leave and a holiday totaling $5,000. For example, the employee was
improperly paid $1,400 for 56 hours of personal and holiday leave in January
2023 because the Office did not remove the employee from its active payroll after
the employee stopped working.
The Office’s response to this review is included as Appendix B to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while the Office
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, the response disputes all
allegations referenced and asserts that all the findings are unsubstantiated. Due to
the lack of specificity in the response, it is unclear what specific information the
Office asserts is unsubstantiated and how it intends to address any decisions from
the State Ethics Commission that result from the above noted referral.
For each finding, we have reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our findings. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included general “auditor’s comments”
in Appendix A in relation to the Office’s assertions on the findings in this review.
After obtaining additional clarification from the Office, we will advise the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee on any issues that we cannot resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the Office’s willingness to address the findings noted in
this review and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information 5
Overview 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The Office did not consolidate multiple procurements from 8
the same vendors, including media and promotional items,
circumventing competitive procurement and approval requirements.
Finding 2 – The Office could not provide documentation to justify 9
approximately $1.1 million spent on media and promotional items
which was significantly higher than other Registers of Wills we
reviewed, including $197,000 for a television show that was never
aired.
Questionable Human Resource and Payroll Activity
Finding 3 – The hiring and ongoing employment of one Office 11
employee appeared questionable and potentially violated State
ethics law.
Finding 4 – The Office improperly paid one employee $5,000 for 205 12
hours and did not attempt to recover the funds.
Auditor’s Comments Appendix A
Agency Response Appendix B
3

--- Page 6 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of a referral received through our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline regarding the Office of the Register of Wills for Baltimore City,
Maryland. The purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegations
were valid and the extent to which the related activities violated State laws,
regulations, and policies. This review was performed in accordance with State
Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Our
review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards.
The allegations related to questionable procurement and payroll practices
involving an Office management employee that had been occurring since at least
2017. Accordingly, the scope of our review included procurement and payment
transactions processed directly by the Office during the period from January 1,
2017 through October 24, 2024. We also reviewed payroll activity for two
employees referenced in the allegation and personnel records for one of these
employees. Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions
with Office personnel and others, as we deemed necessary, to achieve our
objectives. Our review was conducted during the period from November 2024
through March 2025.
State law assigns the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller (OOC)
responsibility for setting the number and salaries of the assistant clerks or deputy
registers at the State’s 24 elected Registers of Wills (ROWs). The OOC is also
responsible for providing guidance to the ROWs regarding fiscal policies,
approving and processing certain procurements, providing input on personnel
matters, and providing certain support services. We obtained information from
the OOC relevant to our review but did not review OOC services provided to the
Office.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less the commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly, as shown in Figure 1. Generally, the remaining
balance of fees and commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of
Maryland to finance other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the
Comptroller pays on behalf of the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees
and commissions that exceed their operating expenses are credited to the General
Fund. If the individual offices’ operating expenditures exceed the revenues
collected then the deficit is paid from the General Fund.
Figure 1
Office of the Register of Wills for Baltimore City
Revenue and Expenditures by Fiscal Year
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Total Revenue
$3,799,338 $3,979,122 $4,383,608 $6,212,074 $5,949,500
Collected
Salaries, Wages, and
$3,574,317 $3,605,608 $3,719,390 $3,864,534 $4,029,517
Fringe Benefits
Other Expenses Paid
by Comptroller of 240,624 309,149 33,441 434,797 298,907
Maryland
Office Expenses Paid
411,663 411,501 292,134 228,114 182,725
by the Office Directly
Total Operating
$4,226,604 $4,326,258 $4,044,965 $4,527,445 $4,511,149
Expenditures
Net Revenue $(427,266) $(347,136) $ 338,643 $1,684,629 $1,438,351
Source: State financial records
5

--- Page 8 ---
Overview
Our Special Investigation Unit reviewed a referral received by our fraud, waste
and abuse hotline with allegations regarding questionable procurement and
payroll practices by an Office of the Register of Wills for Baltimore City,
Maryland management employee that had been occurring since at least 2017. Our
review of the specific allegations disclosed the following:
Allegation 1 – The Office management employee “wasted” taxpayer funds
for unnecessary media (such as, commercials) and promotional items.
We were able to substantiate this allegation. Specifically, as noted in Finding 2,
the Office could not justify media and promotional expenditures, which were
significantly higher than other Registers of Wills. In addition, the Office spent
funds producing a television show that never aired.
Allegation 2 – The Office only procured goods and services from vendors
that the Office management employee knew personally.
We could not substantiate that goods and services were procured from vendors
that the Office management employee knew personally but did identify conditions
that would enable this to occur. Specifically, as noted in Finding 1, the Office did
not consolidate multiple procurements from the same vendors, circumventing
competitive procurement and approval requirements. As a result, the Office was
able to select specific vendors without a competitive procurement process and
could have directed procurements to certain vendors known to the Office
management employee.
Allegation 3 – The Office management employee had two employees on the
Office’s payroll that did not come to work.
We were able to substantiate this allegation. Specifically, as noted in Finding 4,
the Office improperly paid one of these employees for hours they did not work,
such as by awarding the employee leave that they were not entitled to receive.
Additionally, our review identified matters involving the other employee that
could potentially violate State ethics laws, as further described in Finding 3.
Overall Conclusions
Our review did not identify any matters that warranted a referral to the Office of
the Attorney General’s Criminal Division but did identify procurement,
disbursement, payroll, and human resource deficiencies that require corrective
action by the Office, as further described in the findings below. Our review also
6

--- Page 9 ---
identified matters described in Finding 3 that we referred to the State Ethics
Commission. Referral of matters to the Commission does not mean that
violations have taken place, and any final decision as to whether violations
occurred would ultimately be made by the Commission.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Office did not consolidate multiple procurements from the same
vendors, including media and promotional items, circumventing competitive
procurement and approval requirements.
Analysis
The Office did not consolidate multiple procurements from the same vendors,
including media and promotional items, circumventing competitive procurement
and approval requirements. We received an allegation that an Office management
employee “wasted” taxpayer funds for unnecessary media (such as, commercials)
and promotional items and only procured goods and services from vendors the
employee knew personally. According to the Office’s records, during the period
from January 1, 2017, through October 24, 2024, the Office made 1,749 payments
for various office expenses totaling approximately $2.6 million, of which, 1,725
(98.6 percent) totaling approximately $2.3 million were individually valued at
$5,000 or less.
We tested 75 of these payments made to 13 vendors totaling approximately
$268,000, including payments for the media and promotional items referenced in
the allegation.1 Our test disclosed 74 of these payments totaling approximately
$266,000 made to 12 vendors were not consolidated. For example, in fiscal year
2019, the Office made 23 payments totaling $66,100 to one vendor for media
production services, each of which was less than $5,000. In addition, certain of
these payments appeared to have been artificially split to keep the procurements at
or below $5,000. For example, the Office split a procurement for promotional
items totaling $8,300 from one vendor into two separate orders processed on the
same day, each valued less than $5,000. During the period from January 1, 2017
through October 24, 2024, the Office made 339 payments to these 12 vendors
totaling approximately $1.2 million.
While we could not substantiate that the procurements were made from vendors
the management employee knew personally as indicated in the allegation, by not
consolidating these procurements, the Office was able to select vendors to provide
these goods and services without conducting competitive procurements and
1 We selected payments to these vendors for testing based on the nature of the services provided
(such as media and promotional items referenced in the allegation), observations of potential
split procurement activity (such as multiple payments to a vendor within a 30-day period), and
cumulative materiality of payments to the vendors.
8

--- Page 11 ---
obtaining approvals from the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the
Comptroller (OOC). Office management personnel advised us that they could not
remember how these vendors were selected and could not document any
competitive procurement process for the goods and services. We were advised
that the management employee was heavily involved in the Office’s
procurements, approved most of the invoices for payment, and signed most of the
related checks.
State procurement regulations prohibit procurements from being artifically
divided to circumvent procurement requirements and require vendor bids to be
obtained for procurements exceeding $5,000. Additionally, the OOC’s
Procurement Policies and Guidelines for Register of Wills required that Registers
of Wills (ROWs) obtain at least two bids and OOC approval for any procurements
valued over $5,000 and up to $25,000.2 In addition, according to the Policies and
OOC management personnel, the OOC is responsible for conducting the
competitive procurement process for procurements valued over $25,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. consolidate procurements, when appropriate, and refrain from
artificially splitting procurements;
b. solicit competitive bids, as required; and
c. ensure that OOC approvals are obtained, as needed, including those
noted above.
Finding 2
The Office could not provide documentation to justify approximately $1.1
million spent on media and promotional items which was significantly higher
than other ROWs we reviewed, including $197,000 expended for a television
show that was never aired.
Analysis
The Office could not provide documentation to justify approximately $1.1 million
spent on media and promotional items which was significantly higher than other
ROWs we reviewed. We received an allegation that an Office management
employee “wasted” taxpayer funds for unnecessary media (such as, commercials)
and promotional items. We analyzed Office disbursement data during the period
January 1, 2017, through October 24, 2024, and identified $1.1 million in
expenses for media and promotional goods and services (see Figure 2).
2 Effective May 19, 2023, the procurement threshold requiring approvals from OOC was increased
to $15,000, and then on August 31, 2023, the threshold was increased to $25,000.
9

--- Page 12 ---
According to Office management, these goods and services were used to inform
residents of the probate process and the importance of writing a will. However,
the Office could not provide
documentation that it had
Figure 2
assessed the need for these
Media and Promotional Expenses
purchases and to demonstrate
January 1, 2017 to October 24, 2024
how these items would enhance
Amount Description
residents’ knowledge of the
Office’s mission. For example, $346,000 Media Production
the Office spent $1,300 for 500
$595,000 Media Broadcast
manicure sets printed with
$168,000 Promotional Merchandise
“Where there’s a will there’s a
way!” which did not include the Source: Office records
name of the Office or any contact
information. The Office also could not provide documentation that it had
monitored the results of these efforts to ensure the desired outcomes were
achieved and that they were effective uses of State funds.
Our review further disclosed that, during fiscal years 2017 through 2020, the
Office paid $197,000 to produce an informational television show that was never
aired. The Office did not evaluate public interest in the show until after the funds
were expended to produce it. This is significant because subsequent evaluations
by the Office disclosed that there was not sufficient interest to warrant
broadcasting the show publicly, resulting in the waste of the amounts paid to
produce the show.
State laws, regulations, and policies do not prohibit the Office from procuring
media and promotional items. However, the Office’s purchases of these items
were significantly higher than amounts expended by three similarly sized ROWs.
Specifically, these ROWs advised that they did not expend funds for public
service announcements and had spent little to no funds on promotional items.
One ROW had not purchased any promotional items, one spent approximately
$350 per year on pens, and one spent approximately $2,500 per year on pens,
calendars, and other items.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. perform documented analyses to justify future purchases of media and
promotional items, and
b. monitor the outcomes of these purchases to determine if the related
expenditures were an effective use of State funds.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Questionable Human Resource and Payroll Activity
Finding 3
The hiring and ongoing employment of one Office employee appeared
questionable and potentially violated State ethics law.
Analysis
The hiring and ongoing employment of one employee appeared questionable and
potentially violated State ethics law. We received an allegation that an employee
hired by the Office management employee in calendar year 2015 (with an annual
salary of $106,000 as of July 1, 2024), was being paid but was not routinely at
work. Our review of the allegation disclosed the following:
 The Office did not have critical documentation to support the hiring of the
employee, which was conducted directly by the Office management employee
referenced in the allegation. Specifically, the Office could not readily
document how the position was solicited, and the employee’s personnel file
did not contain any of the standard employment documents, such as an
employment application, résumé, and position description. The lack of all
these documents was inconsistent with the personnel files for seven of the
eight other employees we arbitrarily selected and reviewed, which contained
at least some of these documents in their files. Consequently, we were unable
to determine if the hiring of the employee was proper, a description of the
work to be performed by the employee, and whether the employee was
qualified for the position.
 Our review of publicly available information disclosed that the employee
founded and operated a company that provided professional services to the
Office management employee who directly hired the employee. According to
the company’s website, the company continued to provide services to the
management employee subsequent to the employee being hired by the Office.
This activity was not disclosed on the employee’s annual Financial Disclosure
Form submitted to the State Ethics Commission.
 We could not determine if this employee was routinely working at the Office.
We attempted to locate the employee during several site visits, however the
employee was not at the Office. We subsequently requested sign-in sheets for
the days in question and noted the employee was on leave on each of the days
in question.
The aforementioned conditions along with other activity we identified during our
review, raised questions about potential violations of State ethics law. As a result,
11

--- Page 14 ---
we referred this matter to the State Ethics Commission. Senior management
personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that this type of employment
situation could potentially violate State ethics laws. First, an employee’s
operation of a company that does business with a management employee at the
same agency could potentially be a violation of State Ethics law, which prohibits
an employee from having any other employment relationship that would impair
the impartiality and independent judgment of the employee. Second, a
management employee’s direct involvement in hiring an employee with whom
they had an outside business relationship, and the lack of documentation related to
the hiring of the employee, could potentially violate prestige of office provisions
in State Ethics law.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. maintain documentation supporting hiring decisions, such as
documentation of an employee’s qualifications; and
b. take action to comply with any decisions that the State Ethics
Commission provides on these matters.
Finding 4
The Office improperly paid one employee $5,000 for 205 hours and did not
attempt to recover the funds.
Analysis
The Office improperly paid one employee for 205 hours of leave and a holiday
totaling $5,000. We received an allegation that an employee stopped working in
2020 but continued to be paid by the Office. According to State records, this
employee stopped working in March 2022 but was still active on the payroll and
received periodic payments through February 7, 2023.
Our review of five pay periods prior to March 2022 did not identify any improper
payments; however, our review of four pay periods with significant hours paid
from June 2022 through January 2023, disclosed that the employee was
improperly paid for 205 hours. For example, the employee was improperly paid
$1,400 for 56 hours of personal and holiday leave in January 2023 because the
Office did not remove the employee from its active payroll after the employee
stopped working.
The Office advised us that it did not attempt to recover the aforementioned funds
paid to the employee because the employee did not return to work at the Office.
Management personnel at the Department of Budget and Management (DBM)
12

--- Page 15 ---
advised us that the Office should have attempted to recover the funds from the
employee, and any unpaid amounts should have been sent to DBM’s Central
Collections Unit.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure leave and holiday pay is only granted to eligible employees, and
b. pursue recovery of the amounts improperly paid to the employee.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX A
Auditor’s Comments on the Office of the Register of Wills for
Baltimore City Response to Special Review
The Office has indicated that it disputes all allegations referenced in this report
and maintains that all the findings are unsubstantiated. Due to the lack of
specificity in its response, it is unclear what the Office disagrees with or believes
is not presented fairly. Our findings were developed based upon documentation
and explanations received during our fieldwork.
Despite the Office’s position regarding the allegations, the Office did generally
agree to implement all recommendations. In accordance with government
auditing standards, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation and
reaffirmed the validity of our findings and related recommendations. We
continue to believe that the findings and conclusions contained in the audit report
are factually accurate, fairly presented, and properly supported based on
information the Office was able to provide during our fieldwork. As a result, we
did not modify our report.

--- Page 17 ---
APPENDIX B

--- Page 18 ---
Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City, Maryland
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving an Office Management Employee
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Office did not consolidate multiple procurements from the same
vendors, including media and promotional items, circumventing competitive
procurement and approval requirements.
We recommend that the Office
a. consolidate procurements, when appropriate, and refrain from
artificially splitting procurements;
b. solicit competitive bids, as required; and
c. ensure that OOC approvals are obtained, as needed, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We dispute procurement and disbursement allegations and maintain that
additional comments as Findings 1 and 2 are unsubstantiated. However, we recognize the value
deemed necessary. in the recommendations and will ensure that all future procurements are
appropriately consolidated, that no procurements are artificially split,
solicit required competitive bids, and ensure that OOC approvals are
obtained as needed. Further, we will perform documented analysis to
justify future purchases of media and outreach items and diligently
monitor the outcomes of these purchases to ensure that related
expenditures are an efficient use of State funds.
Recommendation 1a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 19 ---
Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City, Maryland
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving an Office Management Employee
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City, Maryland
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving an Office Management Employee
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
The Office could not provide documentation to justify approximately $1.1
million spent on media and promotional items which was significantly higher
than other ROWs we reviewed, including $197,000 expended for a television
show that was never aired.
We recommend that the Office
a. perform documented analyses to justify future purchases of media and
promotional items, and
b. monitor the outcomes of these purchases to determine if the related
expenditures were an effective use of State funds.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We dispute procurement and disbursement allegations and maintain that
additional comments as Findings 1 and 2 are unsubstantiated. However, we recognize the value
deemed necessary. in the recommendations and will ensure that all future procurements are
appropriately consolidated, that no procurements are artificially split,
solicit required competitive bids, and ensure that OOC approvals are
obtained as needed. Further, we will perform documented analysis to
justify future purchases of media and outreach items and diligently
monitor the outcomes of these purchases to ensure that related
expenditures are an efficient use of State funds.
Recommendation 2a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 21 ---
Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City, Maryland
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving an Office Management Employee
Agency Response Form
Questionable Human Resource and Payroll Activity
Finding 3
The hiring and ongoing employment of one Office employee appeared
questionable and potentially violated State ethics law.
We recommend that the Office
a. maintain documentation supporting hiring decisions, such as
documentation of an employee’s qualifications; and
b. take action to comply with any decisions that the State Ethics
Commission provides on these matters.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We dispute human resources and payroll allegations, maintaining that
additional comments as Findings 3 and 4 are unsubstantiated. However, we recognize the value
deemed necessary. in the recommendations and will continue to diligently retain
documentation supporting hiring decisions, including employee
qualification documentation, continue to ensure that leave and holiday
pay is granted to eligible employees only, and audit any payments made
to employees in order to recover any inadvertent compensation.
Recommendation 3a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 22 ---
Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City, Maryland
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving an Office Management Employee
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
The Office improperly paid one employee $5,000 for 205 hours and did not
attempt to recover the funds.
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure leave and holiday pay is only granted to eligible employees, and
b. pursue recovery of the amounts improperly paid to the employee.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We dispute human resources and payroll allegations, maintaining that
additional comments as Findings 3 and 4 are unsubstantiated. However, we recognize the value
deemed necessary. in the recommendations and will continue to diligently retain
documentation supporting hiring decisions, including employee
qualification documentation, continue to ensure that leave and holiday
pay is granted to eligible employees only, and audit any payments made
to employees in order to recover any inadvertent compensation.
Recommendation 4a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: 10/23/25
Please provide details of Refer to agency’s response outlined above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 5 of 5