Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Department of General Services - Office of the Secretary and Other Units


Related Report Dated (7/28/2025)

Video Presentation (Department of General Services - Office of the Secretary and Other Units starts at 10:45)
Date: 2025-09-10
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68c18d98a54896249097c719
Extracted: 2025-09-11T16:13:23.417099
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of General Services (DGS)
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Report Dated July 28, 2025
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
September 10, 2025

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 This audit covers 6 of the 7 DGS units* and includes core DGS
services such as capital projects and grants, disbursements,
cash receipts, accounts receivable, and payroll. In addition, our
audit includes services provided by DGS on behalf of other
State agencies including professional and technical services for
the planning, design, construction, and maintenance of State
facilities; real estate activity; and oversight of State property
and equipment.
 This report covers the period from September 1, 2020 to July
15, 2024. The report contains 11 findings including numerous
findings for which DGS disagrees with the some or all of the
factual accuracy and related recommendations.
* The Office of State Procurement is audited and reported upon separately.
Department of General Services Page 2
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 DGS could not support that $410.9 million in leases to relocate
State agencies were in the State’s best interest.
 DGS did not ensure that lease solicitations were properly
structured and addressed each agency’s needs.
 DGS did not properly evaluate lease proposals.
 DGS could not support numerous aspects of a $167.1 million
lease renewal for the Maryland Department of Environment.
 DGS did not identify and refer unused capital funds to the
Board of Public Works (BPW) to be deauthorized or extended.
 DGS procured construction management services for the
Maryland State House Rehabilitation Project without
competition, did not disclose the anticipated cost of the project
to BPW, and could not support modifications to the contract.
Department of General Services Page 3
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Center Relocation Leases Background
In April 2021, the State began relocating 13 State agencies. As of
July 2024, DGS awarded 8 leases for 9 agencies totaling $410.9
million, with additional annual parking costs totaling $4.7 million.
Total Cost
Lease Term in Square
Agency Over Lease
Years Footage
(in millions)
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 15 463,000 $277.9
Department of Human Services (DHS) 10 149,024 49.4
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) and
Department of Information Technology 10 126,432 38.8
(DoIT)
Comptroller of Maryland (COM) 10 67,586 19.3
State Department of Assessment and
10 47,391 13.4
Taxation (SDAT)
Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) 10 19,329 6.1
Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) 10 16,876 4.7
Department of Disabilities (DoD) 10 4,079 1.3
Totals 893,717 $410.9
Department of General Services Page 4
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Center Relocation Leases (Finding 1)
DGS could not adequately support that entering into lease
agreements totaling $410.9 million to relocate agencies to
Baltimore’s central business district was in the State’s best interest
and did not transparently report the total costs to BPW.
 DGS could not document a cost-benefit analysis weighing the benefits of
purchasing property instead of awarding leases to private entities and the extent
to which it considered the cost-benefit of consolidating leases.
 DGS did not determine the fair market rates for the leases, resulting in a lack of
assurance that the leases were at or below market rates.
 DGS only reported the first-year costs of the leases to BPW instead of the full
cost over the 10-to-15-year terms. DGS also did not present other costs such as
$4.7 million in annual parking costs for the 8 leases awarded as of July 2024.
Department of General Services Page 5
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Center Relocation Leases (Finding 2)
DGS did not structure lease solicitations in accordance with State
procurement regulations and did not ensure that the solicitations
sufficiently addressed each agency’s needs.
 The Requests for Proposal (RFP) did not specify when the agencies needed to
occupy the space nor indicate that proposals would be evaluated based upon
the proposed occupancy date.
 The space solicited did not always sufficiently address agency needs and other
critical requirements, resulting in certain change orders being processed after
the leases were signed that significantly increased the cost.
 DGS could not adequately justify the amount of parking procured, which will total
$51.8 million over the term of the 5 leases tested.
Department of General Services Page 6
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Center Relocation Leases (Finding 3)
DGS did not properly evaluate lease proposals, raising questions as
to whether the awards were the most advantageous to the State.
 DGS did not evaluate the SDAT and MDH lease proposals consistently and in
accordance with the criteria specified in the RFPs.
 DGS did not ensure that the net effective annual rates calculated by its real
estate broker were accurate for use in evaluating lease proposals.
 DGS did not assess whether proposed construction costs included in the leases
were necessary and reasonable, and did not verify that annual rents did not
exceed the maximum allowable rate under State law.
 The SDAT lease is located in a FEMA-designated 100-year flood plain even
though DGS policy provides that State agencies are not to be located in such
areas.
Department of General Services Page 7
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other State Leases (Finding 4)
DGS could not support numerous aspects of the Maryland
Department of Environment (MDE) lease renewal.
 In January 2024, DGS renewed MDE’s lease for 20 years at a cost of $167.1
million. The landlord agreed to perform renovations valued at $10 million.
 The lease rate increased by 8.2 percent from the prior lease. In addition, the
term and annual escalation percentage significantly exceeded other DGS leases.
 DGS procured the renovations (primarily cubicle enhancements) through the
lease instead of competitively procuring the services and did not accurately
represent the renovations to the BPW.
 DGS could not adequately justify the decision to waive the termination for
convenience clause from the MDE lease.
Department of General Services Page 8
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other State Leases (Finding 5)
DGS did not always publish lease awards as required by State
procurement regulations.
 DGS awarded 183 leases between July 2021 and July 2024.
 Our analysis of DGS records disclosed that 172 (or 94 percent) of the 183 lease
awards were not published on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as of
September 2024.
 State regulations require contract awards greater than $50,000 to be published
on eMMA within 30 days of award.
Department of General Services Page 9
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Capital Funds (Finding 6)
DGS did not obtain required procurement documentation from
grantees and did not have a comprehensive policy for conducting
site visits of the related projects.
 According to DGS records, there were 1,845 active capital grants totaling $1.2
billion between October 2022 and April 2024. Our test of 4 capital grants
totaling $12 million disclosed that DGS did not obtain documentation to support
whether the vendors working under these grants were competitively procured.
The Maryland Capital Grants Project Manual encourages grantees to use
competition and requires them to provide DGS with the basis for the selection of
each vendor.
 DGS’ site visit policy did not address how frequently visits were to be conducted
and did not establish a process to prioritize site visits consistent with available
resources. In this regard, DGS could not explain the basis for selecting the 61
capital grants for which site visits were performed between October 2022 and
April 2024.
Department of General Services Page 10
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Capital Funds (Finding 7)
DGS did not have a procedure to identify unused capital funds and
refer them to the BPW for deauthorization or extension.
 State law provides that capital funds must be encumbered within 2 years and
fully expended (or encumbered) within 7 years of when the related State debt is
issued, unless a formal extension is granted by the BPW.
 According to DGS records, as of June 2023, there were 1,596 capital grants and
projects with balances totaling $1.6 billion.
 We identified 335 capital funded grants and projects with balances totaling
$194.2 million as of June 2023 that met the criteria for deauthorization but had
not been reported to the BPW to be deauthorized or extended. For example, 33
grants and projects with unencumbered balances totaling $12.3 million were at
least 7 years old.
Department of General Services Page 11
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Capital Funds (Finding 8)
DGS did not adequately account for funds in a non-budgeted
clearing account and did not determine the proper disposition of
$8.4 million.
 The clearing account was primarily used to receive and spend capital funds for
construction projects funded by other State agencies’ budgets.
 DGS did not analyze the account balance at year-end to determine the individual
construction projects supporting the balance to enable a determination of the
proper disposition of the funds.
 As of June 30, 2024, the account balance included $8.4 million related to
activity from fiscal years 2000 to 2023. DGS acknowledged that $344,000 of
this amount should be reverted to the State General Fund but could not readily
determine the proper disposition of the remaining funds.
Department of General Services Page 12
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Capital Funds (Finding 9)
DGS procured construction management services for the Maryland
State House Rehabilitation Project without competition, did not fully
disclose the cost of the project to the BPW, and could not support
modifications to the contract.
 In January 2022 DGS awarded a $1.5 million construction management services
contract for the project through direct solicitation. Procurements to rehabilitate
historic structures are exempt from State procurement law.
 DGS did not have an exempt procurement policy at the time this contract was
awarded and could not justify the decision to not seek competition.
 DGS did not disclose the anticipated project cost ($37.1 million) to BPW.
 DGS could not support 11 contract modifications totaling $33.5 million.
Department of General Services Page 13
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Accounts Receivable (Finding 10)
DGS did not adequately pursue collection of delinquent accounts
due from State agencies and did not establish sufficient controls
over accounts receivable records.
 Our test of 12 delinquent State agency accounts totaling $6 million disclosed
that DGS had not sent notices for 7 accounts and notices for the other 5
accounts were sent between 8 and 21 months after the account became
delinquent.
 DGS did not address the delinquent State agency accounts with senior
leadership at the related agencies or other Executive Department leadership.
 DGS did not ensure that adjustments to the accounts receivable records were
authorized and proper.
Department of General Services Page 14
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Monitoring of State Property and Equipment (Finding 11)
DGS did not perform inventory compliance audits to ensure State
agencies complied with State property and equipment requirements.
 State law provides that DGS is responsible for State property and equipment
for most State agencies and units.
 We found that DGS had not performed an inventory compliance audit for any
State agency since September 2019.
 DGS inventory audits performed prior to September 2019 disclosed
deficiencies including unrecorded capital equipment and improper
segregation of duties. In addition, OLA audits have historically identified
deficiencies such as State agencies not performing required physical
inventories.
Department of General Services Page 15
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
Our audit of DGS identified numerous concerns related to State
agency leases, monitoring and accounting for capital funds,
delinquent accounts receivables, and State agency compliance with
State property and equipment requirements.
We made detailed recommendations to DGS and we will assess the
status of the recommendations during the course of our next audit.
We are happy to answer any questions.
Department of General Services Page 16
Office of the Secretary and Other Units