Title: Department of Human Services - Social Services Administration
Date: 2025-09-12
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68c486a79057a613fa7fa61e
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:14:03.857237
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
September 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 12, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration (SSA) for the period beginning
May 1, 2020 and ending May 31, 2024. Our two prior audits determined that
SSA’s accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory in accordance with
the rating system we established in conformity with State law. Our current audit
disclosed that SSA had not sufficiently resolved 6 of the 8 findings in our prior
report, certain of which have been repeated since 2008. Based on the nature,
significance, and duration of the findings in the current audit, we have again
concluded that SSA’s accountability and compliance level remains unsatisfactory
for the third consecutive audit.
SSA supervises, directs, and monitors the social services programs of the State’s
24 local departments of social services (LDSSs). According to SSA records,
during fiscal year 2024, approximately 24,000 children participated in SSA
programs and were served by 12,500 providers/parents at a cost of $359.4 million.
Our audit disclosed that SSA had not established a comprehensive and effective
quality assurance program to ensure that the LDSSs were properly administering
these programs. As a result, we noted numerous issues that impacted the safety
and wellbeing of children participating in SSA programs and the potential loss of
State funds.
Specifically, our audit disclosed that SSA did not have comprehensive procedures
to ensure individuals with disqualifying criminal backgrounds did not have access
to children in the State’s care. As a result, SSA was not aware of the 7 registered
sex offenders we identified that had the same address as an approved guardianship

--- Page 4 ---
home housing 10 children as of August 2024 and had not identified that an
individual employed by a group foster care home had been convicted of sexual
assault of a minor. This individual was subsequently charged with crimes
involving children under his care.
SSA also did not ensure that data on its automated system used to monitor the
LDSSs was accurate, and did not ensure foster care children received required
medical and dental exams, and were placed in settings authorized by State law.
We noted numerous children for which there was no support that educational and
health services were provided and who were placed in unauthorized settings
without appropriate supervision. SSA also did not take appropriate corrective
action when the LDSSs did not conduct timely child abuse and neglect
investigations and did not report investigations that were not completed timely to
the General Assembly, as required by State law.
Furthermore, SSA did not meet federal foster care service performance
requirements resulting in penalties totaling $698,296. SSA also did not
investigate and recover up to $34.5 million in overpayments to public foster care
providers, guardians, and adoption subsidy recipients. In addition, SSA did not
ensure federal eligibility determinations were performed properly and timely,
resulting in the potential loss of up to $23 million and did not request federal
reimbursement for certain eligible expenditures, resulting in at least $2.6 million
not being recovered.
Finally, we noted that SSA did not ensure that $27.6 million in payments to a
State university were adequately supported and in accordance with the terms of
the related agreements and that LDSSs established and properly maintained
required trust accounts to conserve federal benefits received by foster children.
DHS’ response to this audit, on behalf of SSA, is included as an appendix to this
report. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while
DHS generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified
certain instances in which statements in the response disagree or appear to be
inconsistent with a report finding and recommendations. In each instance, we
reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of
our finding. In accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, we have
included “auditor’s comments” within DHS’ response to explain our position.
We will advise the Join Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding
issues that we cannot resolve with SSA.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by SSA
and its agreement to implement the audit recommendations.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Local Department of Social Services Oversight
* Finding 1 – The Social Services Administration (SSA) had not 11
implemented comprehensive quality assurance processes and effective
oversight of the State’s Local Departments of Social Services’ (LDSSs)
administration of child welfare programs.
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 2 – SSA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure 12
individuals with disqualifying criminal backgrounds did not interact
with children under its care. As a result, SSA did not identify multiple
individuals with disqualifying convictions that were in positions to
interact with children.
Finding 3 – SSA did not have a process to periodically reconcile the 14
Maryland Sex Offender Registry to it records of SSA providers
and vendors to identify any sex offenders with potential access to
children.
Child, Juvenile, and Adult Management System (CJAMS)
Finding 4 – SSA did not ensure that data on CJAMS used to monitor the 15
LDSSs was accurate and supported.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship
* Finding 5 – SSA did not ensure the LDSSs provided foster care children 17
the required medical and dental exams. We identified numerous foster
children who did not receive exams within the timeframes required by
State regulations.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 6 – SSA did not ensure the LDSSs placed foster care children in 18
settings authorized in State law. We identified 280 children placed in
hotels under the supervision of providers that were not licensed and at
a significantly higher cost to the State.
Finding 7 – SSA did not ensure the LDSSs established and maintained 19
required trust accounts for foster children.
* Finding 8 – SSA did not have comprehensive procedures to identify 20
and recover overpayments to public foster care providers, guardians,
and adoption subsidy recipients.
Finding 9 – SSA did not meet federal foster care service performance 21
requirements resulting in penalties totaling $698,296 being assessed
on the State.
Child Protective Services
* Finding 10 – SSA did not sufficiently address instances when LDSSs did 23
not conduct child abuse and neglect investigations timely.
Finding 11 – SSA did not report child abuse and neglect investigations 24
that were not completed within 60 days to the General Assembly as
required by State law. In addition, SSA could not support its
explanations for untimely investigations, certain of which appeared
questionable.
Federal Funds
* Finding 12 – SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the 25
propriety and timeliness of Title IV-E eligibility determinations and
redeterminations, resulting in lost federal funds potentially totaling
$22.5 million.
Finding 13 – SSA did not request federal reimbursement for all eligible 27
qualified residential treatment placements (QRTP) and evidence-based
practices (EBP) expenditures, resulting in the failure to obtain federal
reimbursement for at least $2.6 million.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Interagency Agreements
* Finding 14 – SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State 27
university for three interagency agreements were adequately supported,
were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed, and were made in
accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 30
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 33
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Human Services Units
as of April 2025
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Human Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration
(SSA) supervises, directs, and monitors social services programs, which are
administered by the local departments of social services (LDSSs) located in each
of the State’s 24 local subdivisions.1 These programs, which include foster care,
adoption and guardianship assistance, and child protective services, are designed
to prevent or remedy abuse, neglect, and exploitation of children and families.
During fiscal year 2024, SSA expenditures totaled approximately $378.8 million
(see Figure 1), of which $359.4 million related to payments to parents and
providers participating in the foster care and adoption and guardianship assistance
programs. Expenditures have significantly increased during the audit period
(from $296.1 million in fiscal year 2019) primarily due to an increase in provider
rates as well as increased usage of one-on-one vendors, which is further
commented upon in Finding 6. During the period from June 30, 2021 to June 30,
2024, SSA had vacancy rates that ranged from 12.1 percent to 22.2 percent. As of
June 30, 2024, approximately 19 percent of the total 141 positions were vacant.
These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this
report.
SSA pays foster care providers, adoptive parents, and guardians monthly based on
rates established in State regulations or through a negotiation process to cover the
costs for basic physical care, food, clothing, and shelter for the children. SSA
also provides the LDSSs with funds to purchase goods and services to support a
family’s service plan when no other resource is available. For example, these
ancillary funds may be used for special educational services, psychological
treatment, vocational training, transportation costs, personal care supplies, day
care services, furniture, appliances, and automobile operating and maintenance
costs.
1 Organizationally, SSA does not have direct oversight of or control over the LDSSs or their
operations. The LDSSs are autonomous units within DHS, directly answerable to the DHS
Secretary.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
SSA Positions, Expenditures, and
Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 114
Vacant 27
Total 141
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 14,193,255
Technical and Special Fees 94,065
Operating Expenses 364,556,0892
Total $378,843,409
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $284,013,208
Special Fund 2,225,385
Federal Fund 92,604,816
Total $378,843,409
Source: State financial records and personnel records
2 Operating Expenses includes payments to parents and providers participating in the foster care
and adoption and guardianship assistance programs. These payments are budgeted separately
from SSA.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 3, 2021. See Figure 2 for the results of
our review.
In our preceding two audit reports dating back to November 2017, we reported
that SSA’s accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance
with the rating system we established in conformity with State law. Based on the
results of our current audit, we have concluded that SSA’s accountability and
compliance level remains unsatisfactory. The significance of the findings and the
number of repeated findings are the primary factors contributing to the current
unsatisfactory rating.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Although the Social Services Administration (SSA) had
implemented certain processes to monitor the
administration of child welfare program services by the Repeated
Finding 1
State’s local departments of social services (LDSSs), we (Current Finding 1)
found they were not necessarily comprehensive or
effective.
SSA had not established effective monitoring of the
LDSSs to ensure that foster children were placed in the Repeated
Finding 2
least restrictive environment and received required (Current Finding 5)
services.
SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for both
ensuring timeliness of child abuse and neglect Repeated
Finding 3
investigations and for the required assessments of (Current Finding 10)
substance-exposed newborns conducted by the LDSSs.
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were
immediately notified of children born to individuals who
Finding 4 Not repeated
previously had their parental rights terminated for abuse or
neglect.
SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the
propriety and timeliness of Title IV-E eligibility
Repeated
Finding 5 determinations and redeterminations, and had not
(Current Finding 12)
conducted quality assurance reviews; both of which
resulted in a potential loss of federal funds.
SSA did not pursue the collection of approximately $4.8 Repeated
Finding 6
million in provider overpayments. (Current Finding 8)
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that
adoption assistance payments funded entirely by the State
Finding 7 Not repeated
were suspended when an adopted child was removed from
the adoptive home.
SSA did not ensure that payments made to a State
university for three interagency agreements were
Repeated
Finding 8 adequately supported, were reasonable in related to the
(Current Finding 14)
tasks performed, and were made in accordance with the
terms of the agreements.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Local Department of Social Services Oversight
Finding 1
The Social Services Administration (SSA) had not implemented
comprehensive quality assurance processes and effective oversight of the
State’s Local Departments of Social Services’ (LDSSs) administration of
child welfare programs.
Analysis
SSA had not implemented comprehensive quality assurance processes and
effective oversight of the LDSSs’ administration of the foster care, adoption,
guardianship, and child protective services programs. The independent LDSSs
are responsible for providing and overseeing specific critical program services
and functions (see Figure 3) as dictated by State law and regulations with policy
direction from SSA. SSA is responsible for ensuring that the LDSSs perform
their responsibilities in accordance with those laws, regulations, and policies.
Without effective and comprehensive oversight
Figure 3
processes outlined in written procedures, SSA
Critical LDSS Services
cannot be assured that all required program
and Functions
services and functions were being effectively
and properly carried out by the LDSSs.
• Approve foster care providers
• Place children with providers
This report details specific instances in which • Ensure children receive
SSA did not ensure that required critical child necessary services, such as
medical and dental care
welfare program services and functions had
• Perform monthly visitations
been conducted by the LDSSs, including two
with children under care
findings related to these programs repeated • Verify provider compliance with
from our preceding audit report. Although SSA regulatory requirements
• Review, assess, and investigate
had certain procedures for monitoring the
child abuse and neglect
services and functions performed by the LDSSs,
allegations
these procedures were not always sufficient as
evidenced by the findings in this report.
Similar conditions regarding SSA’s lack of a comprehensive and effective process
to ensure the LDSSs effectively administered child welfare program services were
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to November
2017. In response to our prior report, DHS, on behalf of SSA, indicated that it
would implement comprehensive quality assurance procedures to monitor the
LDSSs by December 2021. Although SSA developed certain procedures to
11

--- Page 14 ---
monitor LDSS compliance, we determined that these procedures still did not
ensure the LDSSs were properly administering the programs.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance
processes to ensure its child welfare programs are effectively and properly
administered by the LDSSs. Specifically, we recommend that SSA modify its
existing processes to ensure that they provide comprehensive written
procedures for monitoring program services and functions to ensure
compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies; appropriate and
timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting documentation
relating to services and functions performed (repeat).
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 2
SSA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure individuals with
disqualifying criminal backgrounds did not interact with children under its
care. As a result, SSA did not identify multiple individuals with
disqualifying convictions that were in positions to interact with children.
Analysis
SSA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure individuals with
disqualifying criminal backgrounds were not in a position to interact with children
under its care. As a result, SSA did not identify multiple individuals with
disqualifying convictions that were in positions to interact with children. State
laws and regulations require individuals with unsupervised access to children to
have criminal background checks, and specify crimes that disqualify individuals
from providing services.
Guardianship Homes
SSA did not ensure that adults convicted of disqualifying crimes were not residing
at homes approved for the guardianship program. The LDSSs are responsible for
obtaining criminal background checks for all adults residing in the household
when the home is initially approved for the program. According to SSA records,
there were 2,463 guardianship homes during fiscal year 2024. Our review
disclosed that SSA did not conduct periodic follow up to identify any new adults
in the home subsequent to the initial approval. In this regard, as noted in Finding
3, we identified seven individuals on the Maryland Sex Offender Registry (SOR)
whose address was associated with a guardianship home.
12

--- Page 15 ---
One-on-One Services Vendors
SSA did not have a procedure to ensure that criminal background checks were
obtained for vendors that provided one-on-one services to foster care children in
hotels. According to SSA records, during fiscal years 2023 and 2024, SSA used
14 vendors to provide continuous care for children in hotels, including
transportation to school and medical appointments, administering medication, and
meal preparation. Our review disclosed that these vendors were not subject to
LDSS or DHS Office of Licensing and Monitoring (OLM)3 oversight and
consequently criminal background checks for the vendors’ employees were not
obtained.
Our Data Analytics Unit independently obtained State wage data from the
Maryland Department of Labor and conviction records from the Maryland
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services between October 2020 and
December 2023. Our match of these data disclosed that one vendor employed an
individual who was convicted of murder in 1990, which would preclude them
from working with children. SSA was not aware of the conviction and could not
readily determine if this individual had or continues to have unsupervised access
to children.
Foster Care
SSA did not always ensure that criminal background checks were performed and
documented for individuals working or residing at locations housing foster care
children. According to SSA records, there were 109 group foster care homes and
1,275 family foster care homes during fiscal year 2024.
 SSA relied on OLM to ensure that all employees in group foster care homes
were subject to criminal background checks without any independent
verifications by SSA. In this regard, in June 2023, an individual employed by
one group foster care home since December 2022 allegedly transported three
foster care children for inappropriate activity for which a Washington County
LDSS’ investigation concluded that there was evidence of abuse. Although
OLM reviewed this home in April 2023 (which included this individual), they
did not identify the individual was convicted of sexual assault of a minor in
2014 and was listed on the SOR. SSA also could not document any corrective
action as a result of this incident to ensure the criminal background checks
were in fact obtained at these facilities.
3 OLM licenses and monitors group home foster care providers for compliance with applicable
laws and regulations designed to safeguard the health, safety, and well-being of children.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 SSA could not support the conclusions reached during periodic reviews of
family foster care homes. The LDSSs were responsible for ensuring foster
care homes complied with State regulations including criminal background
checks and SSA is responsible for verifying the propriety of the LDSSs’
determinations. We tested 10 foster care homes that SSA reviewed in
December 20234 and noted that SSA concluded that background checks were
performed for all individuals in these homes even though there was no
evidence of a criminal background check for individuals in 5 of the homes
raising questions about the sufficiency and propriety of the reviews. We did
not identify any disqualifying criminal convictions for individuals in these
homes.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SSA
a. work in conjunction with the LDSS and OLM to establish comprehensive
procedures to ensure that all individuals who are in positions to interact
with children under SSA’s care comply with criminal background check
requirements; and
b. take appropriate action when disqualifying criminal activity is identified,
including those noted above, and maintain documentation of all actions
taken.
Finding 3
SSA did not have a process to periodically reconcile the Maryland Sex
Offender Registry (SOR) to its records of SSA providers and vendors to
identify any sex offenders with potential access to children.
Analysis
SSA did not have a process to periodically reconcile the SOR to its records of
SSA providers and vendors to identify any sex offenders with potential access to
children. Our Data Analytics Unit conducted matches between the SOR as of
June 2024 and approximately 240,000 unique records5 (see Figure 4).
4 Test items were selected based on significance and risk.
5 Specifically, the SOR was matched against Individuals Working for SSA Vendors between
October 2020 and December 2023, and Foster Care Parents and Guardianship Homes (addresses)
between May 2020 to August 2024.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 4
OLA Matches to Sex Offender Registry
Category Records Matches to SOR
Individuals Working
222,547 0
for SSA Vendors
Foster Care Parents 8,746 0
Guardianship Homes 8,762 7
Total 240,055 7
Our matches identified 7 registered sex offenders with the same address as an
approved guardianship home. According to SSA records, there were 10 children
placed at these homes as of August 2024. For example, one individual convicted
of sexual misconduct with a minor had the same address as a guardianship home
with 4 children between the ages of 4 and 8. SSA was not aware of any of these
individuals until we provided them our match results in December 2024.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SSA
a. develop a process to obtain and periodically reconcile the Maryland Sex
Offender Registry to its records of SSA providers and vendors, and
b. take appropriate action for any individuals identified, including those
noted above.
Child, Juvenile, and Adult Management System (CJAMS)
Finding 4
SSA did not ensure that data on its Child, Juvenile, and Adult Management
System (CJAMS) used to monitor the LDSSs was accurate and supported.
Analysis
SSA did not ensure that data on CJAMS used to monitor the LDSSs was accurate
and supported. SSA management informed us that in July 2020 CJAMS was
implemented to replace its legacy child welfare information system. CJAMS
functions as the statewide child welfare, foster care, and adoption case
management tool. CJAMS was also used to process transactions, such as
payments made on behalf of children under SSA’s supervision, and as the official
record of all social services program activity. In June 2023, SSA established
procedures using reports generated from CJAMS to assess the LDSSs’
achievement of established performance standards.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our review disclosed that although SSA performed semi-annual reviews to verify
that appropriate support (such as, evidence of a medical exam) was recorded in
CJAMS, it did not ensure that instances of missing or inaccurate documentation
identified by these reviews were corrected. For example, SSA determined there
was no support that initial health exams were performed for 59 of the 453 foster
children tested during its December 2023 review as indicated in the CJAMS data.
SSA could not document its efforts to correct these deficiencies and our test of 10
of these children disclosed that, as of September 2024, CJAMS still inaccurately
reflected that initial health exams were performed for 8 of the children. Similarly,
while CJAMS reflected that virtually all 1,400 school-aged children6 attended
school during fiscal year 2024, our test of 40 of these children7 disclosed that
there was no evidence of attendance (such as a report card) recorded in CJAMS
for 15 children.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to ensure CJAMS data is
accurate and supported.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship
Background
The foster care program provides alternate settings and supportive services to
children who are unable to live at home for various reasons, such as abuse and
neglect. Children are assigned foster status as the result of legal action by the
applicable courts or through voluntary placement. State regulations provide that
the LDSSs are responsible for placing children, in order of preference, with a
relative, in a family foster home, or in a group care setting. Children with serious
emotional, behavioral, medical, or psychological conditions may be placed in
treatment foster care.
The goal of the foster care program is to secure a permanent living arrangement
(such as reunification, adoption, or guardianship) for these children. SSA
provides financial assistance for individuals who adopt or become the legal
guardians of foster children. Adoptive parents are given all the legal rights and
responsibilities that once belonged to the biological parents, while guardians have
the full legal responsibility for the applicable child without terminating the
6 Our total included all children ages 5-17 that had been in care for at least one year, as of May
2024.
7 Our test items were selected based on risk and materiality with an emphasis on LDSS variation.
16

--- Page 19 ---
parental rights of the child’s biological parents. As shown in Figure 5,
expenditures for these programs during fiscal year 2024 totaled approximately
$359.4 million.
Figure 5
Summary of Fiscal Year 2024 Foster Care, Adoption, and
Guardianship CJAMS Data
Number of Number of
Expenditures
Category Children Providers /
(In Millions)
During Year Parents
Treatment Foster Care 1,460 43 $59.8
Group Foster Care 1,180 109 125.4
Adoption Assistance 5,234 3,544 50.0
Guardianship Assistance 3,394 2,463 30.2
Family Foster Care 1,849 1,275 10.6
Teen Mother Foster Care 78 9 4.0
Other Foster Care 455 323 1.9
Subtotal (Maintenance) 13,650 7,766 $281.9
Ancillary 77.5
Total Expenditures $359.4
Source: CJAMS
Finding 5
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs provided foster care children the required
medical and dental exams. We identified numerous foster children who did
not receive exams within the timeframes required by State regulations.
Analysis
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs provided foster care children the required medical
and dental exams. Information on medical and dental exams was recorded in
CJAMS which SSA could have used to monitor the LDSSs. While SSA
established certain benchmarks for overall LDSS compliance with foster care
related services, this data was not utilized to address individual cases that did not
comply with State regulations. In this regard our review of CJAMS disclosed that
numerous children had not received required medical and dental exams within the
timeframes specified in State regulations (see Figure 6).
17

--- Page 20 ---
Specifically, as of May 2024, 640 children had not received a medical exam
within the past year, including 110 children who had not received a medical exam
for between 2 to 6 years. In addition, 1,635 children had not received a dental
exam within the last 6 months, including 140 children who had never received a
dental exam and 278 children who had not received a dental exam for between 2
and almost 7 years. State regulations require a comprehensive health assessment
within 60 days of entering foster care, and subsequently, at a minimum, an annual
medical exam and a dental exam every 6 months.
Figure 6
Untimely Medical and Dental Exams for Foster Care Children
Total Children Out of Compliance
Foster Care Requirement
Children Number Percent
Medical Exam Every Year 2,546 640 25%
Every 6
Dental Exam 3,100 1,635 53%
Months
Source: CJAMS
Similar conditions with LDSS noncompliance were commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports dating back to November 2017. In response to our most
recent report, DHS indicated on behalf of SSA, that it would establish procedures
to ensure LDSS compliance with medical and dental requirements by December
2021. However, as noted above, numerous children in foster care were still not
receiving the required medical and dental exams.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SSA ensure compliance with medical and dental
requirements for each child (repeat).
Finding 6
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs placed foster care children in settings
authorized in State law. We identified 280 children placed in hotels under
the supervision of providers that were not licensed and at a significantly
higher cost to the State.
Analysis
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs placed foster care children in settings authorized in
State law and regulations. State regulations require that children removed from
their home be placed in the least restrictive environment, which includes, in order
of preference, a relative, a family foster home, or a group care setting.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Our review of SSA records disclosed that 280 foster care children were placed in
a hotel under the supervision of a one-on-one vendor between fiscal years 2023
and 2024 including 82 that remained in hotels for between 3 months and 2 years,
of which 23 children were still in a hotel as of July 2024. Although SSA
management advised us that many of these children had special behavioral or
medical needs that required placement with a treatment foster care provider, SSA
could not document its efforts to identify appropriate placements for these
children. SSA expenditures associated with these 280 children totaled
approximately $10.4 million, consisting of $942,000 for the hotel costs and $9.5
million for one-on-one services.8
Since one-on-one vendors are not licensed providers, there is a lack of assurance
that children in their care received satisfactory services. Other deficiencies
related to SSA’s use of one-on-one vendors, including a lack of criminal
background checks for individuals employed by these vendors, are noted
elsewhere in this report. In addition, the aforementioned costs for these children
were significantly higher than children placed in other facilities. For example, the
cost to provide one-on-one services for one of these children between August
2021 and May 2024 was $1,259 per day while the highest approved rate for
treatment foster care during fiscal year 2024 was $281 per day.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SSA ensure all foster children are timely placed in
accordance with State law, including those noted above.
Finding 7
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs established and maintained required trust
accounts for foster children.
Analysis
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs established and maintained required trust accounts
for foster children. The LDSSs apply for federal benefits, such as Supplemental
Security Income, on behalf of children in their care. State law requires a portion
of any federal benefits received on behalf of children 14 and older to be conserved
in a trust account and transferred to the child after they exit the State’s care.
According to SSA records, as of June 2024, the LDSSs had established trust
accounts for 915 children with balances totaling $1.9 million.
8 Expenditures noted include all services received from one-on-one vendors; we could not readily
determine if these services would have also been covered or similarly priced in a different
placement.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Our review disclosed that SSA did not have procedures to ensure the LDSS
established the required trust accounts and to ensure the proper amount of funds
were conserved in these accounts. In this regard, our test of 10 children9
disclosed the LDSS had not established a trust account for 1 child resulting in
approximately $20,000 in federal benefits received between January 2022 and
September 2024 not being conserved for the child. For two other children, the
trust accounts were underfunded by approximately $13,500. For example, the
LDSS did not conserve any of the $7,200 in benefits that one child received
between October 2023 and September 2024.
Deficiencies with trust accounts were also noted by the DHS Office of Inspector
General (OIG) audits of the LDSSs. For example, the OIG determined that one
LDSS did not establish required trust accounts10 for federal benefits totaling
approximately $33,600 received for 9 foster children.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure LDSSs establish trust accounts as
required, and
b. periodically review trust account activity to ensure the account balances
are proper.
Finding 8
SSA did not have comprehensive procedures to identify and recover
overpayments to public foster care providers, guardians, and adoption
subsidy recipients.
Analysis
SSA did not have comprehensive procedures to investigate and recover
overpayments for foster care, guardianship, and adoption subsidies.
Overpayments can occur for multiple reasons, such as payments made for a child
no longer in the provider’s care. According to State records, during fiscal year
2024, SSA payments to these entities collectively totaled $90.8 million.
Although SSA generated CJAMS reports of potential overpayments, SSA did not
investigate transactions identified on these reports to determine if the funds
9 We selected five children aged 14 or older identified as in receipt of federal benefits in our
determination testing and five additional children in receipt of SSI based on relative significance
of trust account balances as reported in SSA’s monitoring report.
10 Special Needs Trust accounts are established for foster children expected to receive more than
$2,000 in certain federal benefits over a six-month period to ensure the child remains eligible for
the benefits.
20

--- Page 23 ---
should be, or had been, recovered. CJAMS reports for fiscal years 2020 through
2024 identified overpayments totaling approximately $34.5 million. Our test of
15 material overpayments from this period totaling $1.5 million11 disclosed that
SSA had not taken action to recover 5 overpayments totaling $80,600. In
addition, while the other 10 overpayments had been recovered, the recoveries
were initiated independently by the LDSSs and SSA was unaware these
overpayments were recovered until we brought the matter to its attention in
August 2024.
A similar condition regarding SSA not pursuing recovery of provider
overpayments was commented upon in our preceding audit report. DHS’
response, on behalf of SSA, to that report indicated that it would establish
procedures to pursue overpayments by October 2021. As noted above, SSA had
still not implemented sufficient procedures to investigate and recover the
overpayments.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive procedures including
steps to
a. investigate potential overpayments identified on the CJAMS reports to
determine if funds need to be recovered; and
b. ensure collection of provider overpayments is adequately pursued,
including those noted above (repeat).
Finding 9
SSA did not meet federal foster care service performance requirements
resulting in penalties totaling $698,296 being assessed on the State.
Analysis
SSA did not meet federal foster care service performance requirements, resulting
in penalties totaling $698,296 being assessed to the State. The Children’s Bureau
of the Administration for Children and Families (ACF) within the United States
Department of Health and Human Services conducts periodic Child and Family
Services Reviews (CFSR) to assess states’ foster care performance outcomes.
SSA’s most recent CFSR conducted in April 2019 determined that SSA was not
in compliance with seven performance outcomes.
 Children are safe from abuse and neglect
11 We selected 10 material private provider transactions and 5 material public provider
transactions from the CJAMS overpayment report.
21

--- Page 24 ---
 Children are safely maintained at home when possible
 Children have permanent and stable living arrangements
 Continuity of family relationships is preserved
 Families have enhanced capacity to provide for children’s needs
 Children receive services to meet their educational needs
 Children receive services to meet their physical and mental health needs
In July 2019, SSA submitted a corrective action plan to ACF, allowing SSA to
continue to receive federal funding and temporarily avoid penalties for
noncompliance. In September 2024, the ACF determined that SSA still was not
in compliance with one of these performance measures (ensuring permanent and
stable living arrangements), resulting in the State being assessed approximately
$698,296 in penalties.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that SSA take appropriate action to ensure that the State
meets the federal CFSR standards.
Child Protective Services
Background
SSA’s Child Protective Services unit provides services to assist children believed
to be neglected or abused by parents or other adults with parental responsibilities.
Allegations of child abuse or neglect are reported to the LDSSs, which are
responsible for conducting investigations. The LDSSs are required to record
allegations received and the steps taken to investigate each allegation in CJAMS.
SSA is responsible for ensuring these investigations are performed in accordance
with State law, which requires investigations to be initiated within 24 hours after
receiving an allegation of abuse and 5 days after receiving an allegation of
neglect, and completed no later than 60 days after the allegation is received.
According to SSA records, during fiscal year 2024 the LDSSs collectively
received approximately 17,000 allegations of abuse and neglect that were
determined to require further investigation.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 10
SSA did not sufficiently address instances when LDSSs did not conduct child
abuse and neglect investigations timely.
Analysis
SSA did not sufficiently address instances when LDSSs did not conduct child
abuse and neglect investigations timely. According to SSA records, 22 LDSSs
did not initiate timely investigations in at least 1 month between January 2023 and
June 2024. Ten LDSSs were noncompliant in this area for 7 or more consecutive
months, including 5 LDSSs that were noncompliant during the entire period. In
addition, 2 LDSSs did not timely complete investigations during periods ranging
from 8 to 18 months in this same period.
SSA required LDSSs to submit corrective action plans when investigations were
not initiated and completed timely. However, our review of the plans for 2 of the
LDSSs that were noncompliant during all 18 months of the aforementioned period
disclosed that they were not sufficiently comprehensive and SSA did not take
action to address the plans. Specifically, the LDSSs cited inadequate staffing
levels as the primary reason for the untimely investigations but did not identify
the number of additional staff needed to achieve compliance. SSA could not
document any specific actions taken to address the staffing issues and did not
refer the 10 LDSSs with untimely investigations in 7 or more consecutive months
to the DHS Secretary as required by its policy. We were advised by SSA
management that this policy was not being enforced since early 2023.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to November 2017. In response to our prior audit report, DHS
indicated on behalf of SSA, that it would implement procedures to ensure the
LDSSs conducted and completed investigations of allegations of child abuse and
neglect within the statutory timeframes by December 2021. As noted above,
while SSA had established procedures to monitor LDSS compliance, it did not
take effective corrective action when the LDSSs did not comply with the statutory
timeframes.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that SSA establish effective procedures to ensure that LDSSs
conduct and complete investigations of allegations of child abuse and neglect
in a timely manner, as required by State law, regulation, (repeat) and its
policy.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 11
SSA did not report child abuse and neglect investigations that were not
completed within 60 days to the General Assembly as required by State law.
In addition, SSA could not support its explanations for untimely
investigations, certain of which appeared questionable.
Analysis
SSA did not report child abuse and neglect investigations that were not completed
within 60 days to the General Assembly. State law requires SSA to submit
quarterly reports to the General Assembly listing investigations that are not
initiated and completed within the statutorily required timeframes, along with an
explanation for each delay. While SSA did report investigations that were
initiated late, it did not report investigations that were not completed timely.
According to SSA records, during fiscal year 2024, there were 2,719
investigations that were not completed within the statutory timeframe, of which
1,762 (or 65 percent) related to one LDSS.
In addition, our review of SSA records disclosed that the reasons for the delays
could not always be supported. Specifically, our test of 10 investigations12 that
were completed between 1 to 12 months late disclosed that for 5 investigations
SSA could not provide documentation to support the cause of the delay. For
example, one LDSS indicated that an investigation was completed nearly 7
months late due to a natural disaster that occurred between February 2024 and
September 2024. SSA could not identify any natural disasters that occurred in
that LDSS’ jurisdiction during this time period.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure reports to the General Assembly are
accurate and supported, and
b. provide an updated report to the General Assembly for fiscal year 2024,
as noted above.
Federal Funds
Background
SSA is eligible to receive federal reimbursement under Title IV-E of the federal
Social Security Act for a portion of the cost of care, generally 50 percent, incurred
12 We selected five investigations from the most used cause of delay (emergency situation) and
five investigations in which the cause of delay was “reason not provided by law”.
24

--- Page 27 ---
on behalf of eligible children. State regulations provide that SSA is to determine
eligibility for Title IV-E funding within 60 days of the date a child is removed
from their home and conduct eligibility redeterminations every 12 months
thereafter.
The Federal Family First Prevention Services Act (FFPSA) effective October 1,
2019, modified Title IV-E funding to allow SSA to be eligible for a 50 percent
reimbursement for evidence-based practice (EBP) prevention costs and altered
eligibility criteria for certain non-family-based placements, including qualified
residential treatment placements (QRTPs). According to State accounting
records, SSA received Title IV-E reimbursements totaling $111.3 million during
fiscal year 2024.
Finding 12
SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and
timeliness of Title IV-E eligibility determinations and redeterminations,
resulting in lost federal funds potentially totaling $22.5 million.
Analysis
SSA did not have an effective process to ensure that initial Title IV-E eligibility
determinations were performed properly and timely for all children to maximize
federal funding.
 According to SSA records, as of June 2024, eligibility determinations had not
been recorded in CJAMS for 2,100 children who primarily entered the State’s
care between May 2020 and May 2024. As a result, SSA did not obtain
federal reimbursement for the cost of these children’s services, which
potentially totaled $22.5 million during the aforementioned four-year period.
SSA advised that it was unable to complete determinations for approximately
1,800 of these children due to CJAMS system issues but could not readily
explain the lack of determinations for the other 300 children. As of June
2025, SSA had not taken alternative action to enable the recovery of federal
funds (such as manually performing the determinations) and could not provide
an estimate for when the CJAMS issues would be resolved.
 SSA did not always properly verify Title IV-E determinations. Our test of the
initial or most recent redetermination for 45 children,13 including 24 children
SSA determined to be ineligible, disclosed that 6 children were improperly
determined to be ineligible for some or all Title IV-E funding because
13 We selected our test items based on a combination of factors including materiality, eligibility
status, placement types, and jurisdiction.
25

--- Page 28 ---
information was incorrectly entered or missing. Although a supervisor
reviewed the 6 determinations, these errors were not detected and,
consequently, SSA did not obtain reimbursement for the federal share of these
children’s services, which totaled $475,200 for the period between May 2020
and May 2024. For example, for 3 children, SSA did not obtain available
signed court orders supporting the out-of-home placement. SSA could not
readily explain why the supervisor did not identify the errors during their
review.
 SSA did not ensure determinations were completed within the timeframes
prescribed in State regulations. Our aforementioned test of determinations
and redeterminations for 45 children disclosed that 22 initial determinations
were completed from 115 days to 3.5 years after the child entered care. In
addition, 4 annual redeterminations were completed 183 days to 2.5 years late
and 9 annual redeterminations were not completed as of July 2024, up to 4
years late.
A similar condition regarding improper Title IV-E determinations was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to November
2017 and a similar condition regarding untimely Title IV-E determinations was
commented upon in our prior audit report. DHS’ response to our prior report, on
behalf of SSA, indicated that it would conduct supervisory reviews of all
determinations to ensure the propriety and timeliness of the determinations. As
noted above, these reviews were not always effective to ensure the determinations
were proper and did not address whether the determinations were performed
within the timeframes established in State regulations.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility determinations are completed properly
and timely for all children and pursue federal reimbursement for eligible
expenditures (including those noted above) (repeat); and
b. conduct reviews to ensure that Title IV-E eligibility determinations are
proper, as required by SSA policy (repeat).
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 13
SSA did not request federal reimbursement for all eligible qualified
residential treatment placements (QRTP) and evidence-based practices
(EBP) expenditures, resulting in the failure to obtain federal reimbursement
for at least $2.6 million.
Analysis
SSA did not request federal reimbursement for all eligible QRTP and EBP
expenditures. According to SSA records, fiscal years 2023 and 2024 payments to
QRTP14 and EBP providers totaled $51.1 million and $3.6 million, respectively.
Specifically, we tested approximately $6.3 million paid to EBP15 and QRTP16
providers between July 2022 and June 2024, of which SSA could have received
federal reimbursement of $3.15 million. Our test disclosed that, as of June 2025,
SSA had not requested federal reimbursement for $3 million because it had not
received the necessary documentation from the LDSSs. SSA advised that $2.6
million of this amount was no longer recoverable due to the age of the
expenditures and because certain documentation requirements are time-sensitive
to when the child entered the placement, which has since passed.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to ensure that federal
reimbursement is obtained for all eligible QRTP and EBP expenditures.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 14
SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university for
three interagency agreements were adequately supported, were reasonable in
relation to the tasks performed, and were made in accordance with the terms
of the agreements.
Analysis
SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university were
adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed, and
were made in accordance with the terms of the agreements. Between July 2018
14 At the time of our fieldwork May and June 2024 QRTP data was not available.
15 We selected all payments made to EBP providers for testing.
16 We arbitrarily selected 5 non-consecutive months for testing.
27

--- Page 30 ---
and November 2023, SSA entered into three interagency agreements17 with a
combined value of $34.1 million with a State university to provide certain
services related to child welfare. According to State records, payments under
these agreements as of April 2024 totaled $27.6 million which were primarily
based on the actual time spent and the salary costs of the applicable university
personnel. Each agreement identified the university employees who would
perform the work and their salaries (including fringe benefits), and the percentage
that each employee’s time would apply to work under the agreement.
Our test of 20 invoices totaling $2.4 million submitted during fiscal year 2024,18
of which $1.8 million related to direct labor charges, disclosed that the records
SSA obtained to support these invoices did not detail the actual time spent by
each employee on SSA projects to support the propriety of the charges and the
reasonableness in relation to the tasks performed. Although SSA advised that the
university could not provide this documentation, we were able to obtain the
detailed payroll records from the university. However, since SSA did not
establish expected estimates to complete each task, we could not determine the
reasonableness of the time charged for the tasks performed.
Our test also disclosed that SSA paid $144,800 in fiscal year 2024 for 11
individuals who were not included in the agreements. While SSA management
advised us that it received verbal notice from the university of all personnel
changes, SSA could not document that it had approved the use of these 11
individuals and the agreements did not address a process for approving personnel
changes or additions.
A similar condition regarding the lack of supporting documentation was
commented upon in our five preceding audit reports dating back to October 2008.
In addition, a similar condition regarding paying for individuals who were not in
the agreements was commented upon in our two receding audit reports dating
back to November 2017. DHS’ response to our prior report on behalf of SSA
indicated that it would establish procedures to ensure the propriety of the State
university’s invoices by June 2022. As noted above, the documentation SSA
obtained was not sufficient to verify the propriety of the amounts billed.
17 During this period, SSA renewed these interagency agreements one to two times. Interagency
agreements are used to obtain services from State universities. Interagency agreements are
exempt from State procurement laws, including the requirements for competitive procurement,
publication of solicitations and awards, and Board of Public Works’ approval.
18 We selected all fiscal year 2024 invoices SSA had paid, as of September 12, 2024.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Recommendation 14
We recommend that SSA
a. implement a process to ensure the propriety of State university invoices,
for example, obtain and review payroll records or restructure the
agreements to base payment on specific deliverables to be monitored by
SSA, or a combination thereof (repeat); and
b. ensure all staffing changes are documented and approved.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration (SSA) for the period beginning
May 1, 2020 and ending May 31, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SSA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal fund reimbursement; foster care, child
protective services, adoption and guardianship assistance; the Child, Juvenile, and
Adult Management System (CJAMS); procurements and disbursements; and
interagency agreements. We also determined the status of the findings contained
in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include various support services provided to SSA by DHS.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
DHS – Office of the Secretary and related units. In addition, our audit did not
include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of SSA’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including SSA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 1, 2020 to May 31, 2024, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
30

--- Page 33 ---
and to the extent practicable, observations of the SSA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from CJAMS for the purpose of testing certain areas, such
as foster care requirements, federal fund recoveries, child protective services
investigations, and adoption and guardianship assistance. We performed various
tests of the relevant data in order to determine data reliability. Use of the data
was restricted to the situations in which the data were deemed to be reliable for
the purposes they were used. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
SSA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SSA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
31

--- Page 34 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SSA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SSA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
In our preceding two audit reports, we determined that SSA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. Our current audit disclosed that SSA’s
accountability and compliance level remained unsatisfactory. The primary factors
contributing to the unsatisfactory rating were the significance of the audit
findings, the number of repeat findings, and SSA’s lack of sufficient monitoring
of the 24 local departments of social services for compliance with numerous
policies and regulations. Our rating conclusion has been made solely pursuant to
the aforementioned law and rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee. The rating process is not a practice prescribed by
professional auditing standards.
The response from DHS, on behalf of SSA, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Department of Human Services Units
As of July 2025
Most Recent Number of Repeat
Name of Audit Total Findings
Report Date Findings
1 Local Department Operations 4/11/2025 4 3
2 Child Support Administration 4/3/2025 1 1
Office of the Secretary and
3 2/28/2025 9 1
Related Units
Family Investment
4 10/21/2022 10 5
Administration
Total 24 10
33

--- Page 36 ---
APPENDIX
Wes Moore, Governor • Aruna Miller, Lt. Governor • Rafael López, Secretary
September 9, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards,
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
In response to the Office of Legislative Audits’ correspondence dated August 22,
2025, please find enclosed our response to the draft report for the Legislative
Audit Report of the Department of Human Services – Social Services
Administration for the period beginning May 1, 2020 and ending May 31, 2024.
The safety and well-being of Maryland's children are our highest priority. As such, we
take the findings of this audit with the utmost seriousness. In the 1.5 years of the
4-year audit period during which I served as Secretary, our leadership team has
moved with urgency and challenged the status quo not only with the Social Services
Administration, but across the entire department. We are enhancing our internal
quality control, raising standards, and improving our information system of record to
better monitor performance. We will continue to move urgently in partnership with
all 24 of our local departments of social services, state and federal partners to
implement proactive solutions to resolve decades old issues identified in the audit.
We are fully committed to ensuring the highest standards of care and oversight in the
administration of child welfare programs. Marylanders deserve nothing less than
world class service.
We are happy to answer any questions. Please contact Marva Sutherland, Inspector
General, at Marva.Sutherland@maryland.gov if you would like to continue the
conversation.
In service,
Rafael López
Secretary
Enclosures:
25 S. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500
Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 37 ---
cc:
Carnitra White, Principal Deputy Secretary
Webster Ye, Chief of Staff
Gloria Brown Burnett, Deputy Secretary for Operations
Daniel Wait, Deputy Secretary for Talent & Customer Service
Heather Zenone, Assistant Secretary for Policy & Data
Larry Handerhan, Assistant Secretary for Programs
Dr. Alger Studstill, Jr. Executive Director Social Services Administration
Tennille R. Thomas, Principal Deputy Executive Director, Social Services
Administration
Marva Sutherland, Inspector General
Shelly-Ann Dyer, Assistant Inspector General for Audits
2

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Local Department of Social Services Oversight
Finding 1
The Social Services Administration (SSA) had not implemented
comprehensive quality assurance processes and effective oversight of the
State’s Local Departments of Social Services’ (LDSSs) administration of
child welfare programs.
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance
processes to ensure its child welfare programs are effectively and properly
administered by the LDSSs. Specifically, we recommend that SSA modify its
existing processes to ensure that they provide comprehensive written
procedures for monitoring program services and functions to ensure
compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies; appropriate and
timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting documentation
relating to services and functions performed (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The safety and well-being of children are our highest priority. We are
additional comments as fully committed to ensuring the highest standards of care and oversight
deemed necessary. in the administration of child welfare programs.
We provide comprehensive oversight and monitoring of our Local
Departments of Social Services’ (LDSSs) administration of child welfare
programs. This oversight is aligned with the federal metrics and state
measures, and has been effective in producing improvements across
several child welfare practice areas.
While we can’t speak to what was done prior to when we took office,
since 2023, we maintain rigorous oversight of all 24 LDSSs through our
Audit, Compliance, and Quality Improvement (ACQI) unit, which
conducts weekly monitoring, monthly notification, good cause
exemptions, and quarterly Quality Assurance (QA) reviews. To ensure
ACQI oversight results in continuous improvement, we hold local
leadership accountable through monthly meetings to thoroughly review
audit findings and make needed changes to improve compliance in our
administration of child welfare programs.
Page 1 of 32

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
This oversight significantly improved our compliance with state and
federal regulations in benchmark areas, including:
● Child Protective Services (CPS) Face-to-Face timeliness
● Substance Exposed Newborn (SEN) Face-to-Face timeliness
● Substance Exposed Newborn - Maryland Family Risk
Assessment (SEN MIFRA) timeliness
● SEN Safe-C timeliness
● Caseworker Visitation
CPS Face-to-Face timeliness improved from 66% in February 2023 to
83% in July 2025 on average statewide, with a 95% compliance
benchmark. SEN Safe-C timeliness improved from 68% in February
2023 to 89% in July 2025 on average statewide, with a 90% compliance
benchmark. Source: SSA Monthly Data Trends Report
We are committed to continuously improving our quality assurance. We
are conducting a comprehensive review of our QA and notification
systems, which will be completed by June 2026. We anticipate
completing initial updates in January 2026 to reflect updated kinship
regulations.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2026
Please provide details of The safety and well-being of children are our highest priority. We agree
corrective action or with the recommendation and are committed to continuously improving
explain disagreement. our existing Quality Assurance (QA). We currently use a QA Desk
Guide, which outlines written procedures for completing local QA, and
we implemented Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for overall
monitoring. We hold ourselves accountable to continuous improvement
and are modifying both documents to create more comprehensive written
procedures and a formal escalation process within our SOP, to further
improve LDSS compliance. We expect to complete these revisions by
January 2026.
We are committed to continuously improving our compliance,
efficiency, and effectiveness in fully addressing OLA’s
recommendations. We are also establishing a statewide QA process to
support continuous quality improvement in service delivery across key
outcome areas: prevention, safety, permanency, and well-being. We
expect to complete this statewide QA by January 2026.
Page 2 of 32

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 2
SSA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure individuals with
disqualifying criminal backgrounds did not interact with children under its
care. As a result, SSA did not identify multiple individuals with
disqualifying convictions that were in positions to interact with children.
We recommend that SSA
a. work in conjunction with the LDSS and OLM to establish comprehensive
procedures to ensure that all individuals who are in positions to interact
with children under SSA’s care comply with criminal background check
requirements; and
b. take appropriate action when disqualifying criminal activity is identified,
including those noted above, and maintain documentation of all actions
taken.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The safety and well-being of children are our highest priority. We are
additional comments as fully committed to ensuring background checks are completed for
deemed necessary. individuals interacting with children under our care.
Guardianship Homes
We conduct criminal background checks (as detailed in COMAR
07.02.11.27(A) and (D)) before a court's decision to grant guardianship.
This pre-guardianship assessment ensures that individuals do not have
disqualifying criminal backgrounds. Post-guardianship, a child is no
longer under our direct legal custody or ongoing oversight for day-to-
day interactions. While our mission is to ensure the safety and well-
being of children, we do not have legal authority to conduct ongoing
monitoring or background checks on individuals interacting with a child
after a court-ordered guardianship is terminated.
The Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 07.02.11.27 (E) states:
“An order granting custody and guardianship to an individual under this
regulation terminates the local department's legal obligations and
responsibilities to the child.” Furthermore, COMAR 07.02.11.05
confirms this termination of involvement, stating that a placement
Page 3 of 32

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
episode ends when a child is no longer in out-of-home care and the
LDSS no longer has legal custody or guardianship, as defined in
Regulation .03B. Imposing such a requirement post-guardianship would
exceed the Department's defined legal authority and ongoing
responsibilities as set forth in COMAR.
One-on-One
To ensure all individuals who interact with children under our care
comply with criminal background check requirements, we issued a
Request For Proposal (RFP) covering 22 of 24 jurisdictions (Baltimore
City and Anne Arundel County have a combined RFP with the same
scope of work). The RFP scope of work requires all employees
providing one-on-one support to undergo criminal background checks,
consistent with the requirements for private providers. As of August
2025, the evaluation committee is reviewing technical proposals.
The audit report states that one vendor employed an individual who was
precluded from working with children. The vendor confirmed the
employee no longer works for them and we confirmed there is no
invoice in CJAMS referencing this employee.
Out-of-Home (Foster) Care
We respectfully disagree with this analysis. Our Office of Licensing and
Monitoring (OLM) is responsible for reviewing criminal background
clearances for private Child Care Placement Agencies and Residential
Child Care Programs.
With respect to the specified group home provider, in late 2023, OLM
learned that the group home had removed portions of its employees’
criminal background clearances to avoid OLM review. OLM informed
SSA, and we placed the provider on the SSA Hotlist with a placement
moratorium effective November 20, 2023, halting new placements
during OLM’s investigation. On December 1, 2023, OLM moved to
revoke this agency’s license to operate as a DHS-licensed residential
child care program, which was upheld. We no longer license this
provider. We removed all youth and terminated services with the
provider by February 2024.
Additionally, the team member responsible for reviewing the criminal
background clearance and their supervisor were disciplined. OLM
provided comprehensive training to all licensing specialists and
implemented a CPA Background Check Verification tool to ensure
Page 4 of 32

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
accuracy of reviews based on COMAR regulations for group homes and
child placement agencies. This tool helps reviewers interpret the results
of criminal record checks consistently and standardizes how licensing
specialists review, verify, and document background checks. It explains
key legal terms that may appear in background checks, requires
verification of the completeness of the background check itself, and
ensures compliance with state and federal regulations by identifying
disqualifying offenses or missing documentation.
In 2024, OLM conducted a 100% review of all provider employees,
privately-certified resource parents, and adult household members to
ensure compliance with applicable regulations as they existed in 2024,
specifically, COMAR 14.31.06.05A(4)(c), (d), and (e), COMAR
07.05.01.09B(3), and COMAR 07.05.02.13A(3)(c) and (d).
We learned from the Children’s Bureau that our regulations for
privately-certified foster parents lacked a “crimes of violence”
prohibition required by Title IV-E of the Social Security Act, and we are
updating this regulation. Pending that regulatory change, OLM reviews
criminal background clearances for our contractual compliance,
including the “crimes of violence” prohibition. To carry out this
responsibility, OLM has implemented the Felony Crimes of Violence
Not Included in COMAR 07.05.02.13A(3)(c) Review Tool. While OLM
does not have regulatory authority to cite or sanction providers for
employing or certifying resource parents who have disqualifying
offenses outside of those listed in COMAR, they notify us when they
identify a disqualifying offense, and we require the private provider to
take corrective action, which includes not placing any further youth in
the home and moving any current youth placed in the home to a safer
environment.
Family Out-of-Home Care
For family out-of-home care, when we enter an initial application in the
electronic system of record, the system has a built-in control mechanism
that will not allow the application to be approved unless all household
members 18 years and older have completed background checks.
To further protect children in out-of-home care, we are developing a
system that will alert team members 30 and 15 calendar days prior to a
household member’s 18th birthday, as well as on the birthday itself. The
notifications will alert all assigned workers and their supervisors, and
will generate a new alert every time a team member logs into the system
Page 5 of 32

--- Page 43 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
until the background clearance is entered. We expect the new alert
system will go into effect in October 2025.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2026
Please provide details of We will work with the OLM and Local Departments of Social Services
corrective action or to ensure one-on-one providers who are in positions to interact with
explain disagreement. children under the Department’s care and custody comply with criminal
background check requirements as required by Federal and State law. To
ensure background checks are completed for private out-of-home care
providers, our Office of Licensing and Monitoring (OLM) is responsible
for reviewing criminal background clearances for private Child Care
Placement Agencies and Residential Child Care Programs.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2025
Please provide details of We will work with the Local Departments of Social Services to take
corrective action or action when we identify disqualifying criminal activity, including the
explain disagreement. immediate suspension or revocation of approval or licensure, removing
the youth from the affected setting, and initiating a corrective action
plan.
COMAR 07.05.02.09B requires privately certified resource parents to
notify the provider agency within 48 hours of changes in the resource
parent's household. OLM reviews all information for household
members as listed by the provider agency, conducts home visits, and
inquires about any changes in household status.
While household members turning 18 may not have a prior criminal
history, initiating background checks for them allows OLM or the
provider agency to be notified if they are subsequently convicted of a
crime.
Auditor’s Comment: SSA agrees with the recommendations but indicates that
continuing to monitor children after they are placed in guardianship would exceed
its defined legal authority and responsibilities. However, SSA is responsible for
certifying guardianship homes and under that responsibility, we believe they
should implement the recommendations to ensure the ongoing safety of children
placed in these settings by the State.
Page 6 of 32

--- Page 44 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
SSA also disagrees with the factual accuracy of our comments regarding out-of-
home foster care. However, nothing in the response contradicts the facts
presented in our analysis.
Page 7 of 32

--- Page 45 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
SSA did not have a process to periodically reconcile the Maryland Sex
Offender Registry (SOR) to its records of SSA providers and vendors to
identify any sex offenders with potential access to children.
We recommend that SSA
a. develop a process to obtain and periodically reconcile the Maryland Sex
Offender Registry to its records of SSA providers and vendors, and
b. take appropriate action for any individuals identified, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The safety and well-being of children are our highest priority. We will
additional comments as continue to use licensing and monitoring to ensure provider compliance
deemed necessary. for the safety of our children.
We exercise direct oversight of vendor employees through established
licensing and contractual requirements, and we monitor vendor records
to ensure that sex offenders do not have access to children in our care.
Provider agencies are responsible for completing all required criminal
background checks and screening for disqualifying offenses, including
those that would result in registration on the Maryland Sex Offender
Registry (MSOR). Individuals with disqualifying backgrounds are not
eligible for hire, and if identified after hire, providers are expected to
take immediate corrective action, including termination and appropriate
notifications.
Recommendation 3a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of We detail above the steps we take to ensure children’s safety, and we are
corrective action or committed to exploring additional measures to protect the children in our
explain disagreement. care. We are in the early planning phase to connect CJAMS to the
appropriate registry system to further ensure the safety of our children.
The estimated completion date is to be determined pending further
assessment.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2025
Page 8 of 32

--- Page 46 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of We will continue to ensure Local Departments of Social Services
corrective action or (LDSS) and private providers take appropriate action whenever
explain disagreement. disqualifying criminal activity is identified, as specified in COMAR.
This includes suspending or revoking approval of licensure, removing
youth from the affected setting, and initiating corrective action plans.
Regarding the seven guardianship cases referenced in the audit report,
the Department does not have the legal authority to conduct ongoing
monitoring or background checks on individuals interacting with a child
after a court-ordered guardianship is terminated. Nevertheless, as soon as
these cases were identified, we took action. In one case, we contacted
law enforcement who conducted a safety check and confirmed the
children were safe. In another case, we contacted the Office of Parole
and Probation and found that while an identified individual was on the
registry, there were no restrictions prohibiting their presence around
children. For the remaining cases, law enforcement and probation
officers determined there was insufficient information to warrant a
welfare check.
Our monitoring efforts are working, as confirmed by Figure 4 in OLA’s
report, which shows no matches for Individuals Working for SSA
Vendors (222,547) and Foster Care Parents (8,746) against the SOR.
We will continuously improve and hold ourselves accountable to ensure
the safety of the children we serve.
Auditor’s Comment: Although SSA purports to disagree with recommendation
3a, it appears to agree with the recommendation in principle. Specifically, the
response indicates that SSA is working on a process to connect CJAMS with the
SOR.
Page 9 of 32

--- Page 47 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Child, Juvenile, and Adult Management System (CJAMS)
Finding 4
SSA did not ensure that data on its Child, Juvenile, and Adult Management
System (CJAMS) used to monitor the LDSSs was accurate and supported.
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to ensure CJAMS data is
accurate and supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2026
Please provide details of We are fully committed to ensuring that Child, Juvenile, and Adult
corrective action or Management System (CJAMS) data used to monitor Local Departments
explain disagreement. of Social Services (LDSSs) is accurate and supported. We are
continuously improving monitoring and data quality within CJAMS. Our
areas of focus include:
1. Clarifying Roles and Responsibilities:
We are reinforcing and clarifying the distinct roles and responsibilities
of SSA and the LDSSs in ensuring CJAMS data accuracy. SSA monitors
overall data quality and performance trends, while the LDSSs are
responsible for the accurate and timely input of individual case data and
supporting documentation.
2. Enhancing Monitoring and Feedback Mechanisms:
We are evaluating our existing monitoring procedures to provide more
targeted feedback to LDSSs on data quality issues, particularly
concerning critical data such as initial health exams and educational
records, as identified in the audit. This may include:
● Developing more robust reporting mechanisms to identify and
flag missing or inaccurate essential data points.
● Strengthening communication channels with LDSSs to ensure
identified deficiencies are corrected in a timely manner.
● Focusing on the most important data elements that directly
impact program outcomes.
Page 10 of 32

--- Page 48 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
3. Providing Targeted Training and Technical Assistance:
We are assessing the need for additional training and technical assistance
to LDSS team members on proper data entry procedures and
documentation requirements within CJAMS, with a particular emphasis
on areas where inaccuracies were identified.
4. Partnering with the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE) and Local School Systems:
We will continue discussions with MSDE and local school systems to
implement a data sharing agreement to include data feed and report cards
for youth in out-of-home care.
We are committed to continuous improvement in CJAMS data accuracy
across all 24 LDSSs.
Page 11 of 32

--- Page 49 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship
Finding 5
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs provided foster care children the required
medical and dental exams. We identified numerous foster children who did
not receive exams within the timeframes required by State regulations.
We recommend that SSA ensure compliance with medical and dental
requirements for each child (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The safety and well-being of children are our highest priority. We agree
additional comments as with the analysis of the finding and are committed to ensuring children
deemed necessary. in out-of-home care receive necessary medical and dental care.
During SFY 2024, 93% of children entering out-of-home care had their
initial health screenings completed within five business days of
placement, and 89% had comprehensive health assessments completed
within 60 calendar days of placement. We credit these outcomes to the
work of our Audit, Compliance, and Quality Improvement (ACQI) unit.
We continue to work to overcome challenges finding dental providers
offering timely services, as well as ensuring older children accept dental
evaluation and treatment. Parts of our state, in particular the Eastern
Shore, lack pediatric dental providers. To overcome these challenges, we
are working with Skygen, the dental Administrative Service
Organization (ASO), dental providers, and LDSSs to improve dental
care for children in out-of-home care. We are also partnering with the
Maryland American Dental Association and the Maryland Dental Action
Coalition to find strategies to improve access to oral health care.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: TBD
Please provide details of We are committed to continuous improvement to ensure children receive
corrective action or necessary care. We improved CJAMS to generate alerts for upcoming or
explain disagreement. follow-up medical and dental exams, aligning with State regulatory
requirements.
We will implement a twice-per-year review to identify overdue medical
and dental exams, and notify and ensure LDSSs resolve those cases. We
Page 12 of 32

--- Page 50 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
are fully committed to meeting the medical and dental needs for youth in
care.
Page 13 of 32

--- Page 51 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs placed foster care children in settings
authorized in State law. We identified 280 children placed in hotels under
the supervision of providers that were not licensed and at a significantly
higher cost to the State.
We recommend that SSA ensure all foster children are timely placed in
accordance with State law, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The safety and well-being of children are our highest priority. We
additional comments as partially agree with the analysis provided for this finding. Any child
deemed necessary. placed in a hotel is one child too many. We consistently partner with
Local Departments of Social Services (LDSSs) to identify and secure
appropriate placements for youth based on clinical recommendations,
diagnoses, and behavioral needs. When a child is removed from their
home, they should be placed in the least restrictive, most family-like
setting, including with relatives, in family out-of-home settings, or, when
necessary, in group care settings.
We require placement efforts be documented for all youth in out-of-
home care using the standardized Placement Efforts form. This ensures
that we consistently record efforts to identify the most appropriate and
available setting for children.
We disagree with the assertion that the highest approved rate for
treatment foster care in Fiscal Year 2024 was $281. The majority of
youth who experienced a hotel stay during the review period did not
require treatment foster care services, but instead required higher levels
of care, including therapeutic group homes or residential treatment
centers (RTCs). In FY24, the approved per diem rates for group care
settings ranged from $271.69 to $1,541.43, while the per diem cost for
RTCs ranged from $392 to $931.
We continue to prioritize identifying appropriate placements that meet
the clinical and behavioral needs of youth, and acknowledge the ongoing
challenges related to placement capacity and availability across the
continuum of care.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2026
Page 14 of 32

--- Page 52 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Any child placed in a hotel is one child too many. We acknowledge the
corrective action or challenges related to youth placed in hotel settings and affirm that hotel
explain disagreement. stays are used only as a last resort. To improve oversight and reduce
hotel placements, we have taken the following steps:
1. Policy Implementation:
We issued SSA-CW Policy #25-01, which gives formal guidance on
reporting and documentation requirements for any youth in care placed
in a hotel setting. Per the policy, all hotel stays must be reported to us,
and a Rapid Response Meeting must be convened within 48 hours. The
SSA Placement and LDSS team members must then conduct ongoing
weekly meetings for each case. We will make revisions to SSA-CW
Policy #25-01 as additional improvements are completed in CJAMs.
These coordinated efforts have resulted in a 77% reduction in the
number of hotel stays during FY2025.
2. New Residential Resources:
To help reduce the use of hotel stays, we contracted with four residential
child care providers to increase placement capacity and deliver services
targeted to youth at risk of hotel placement. We issued a Statement of
Need in June 2025 to engage additional providers who have the capacity
to obtain licensure and offer expanded placement resources. We expect
to complete this effort in the summer of 2026 as part of our broader
strategy to strengthen the continuum of care and reduce reliance on
temporary and non-traditional placements.
3. System Enhancements:
We completed updates to CJAMS to clearly identify and track hotel
stays.
4. One-on-One Services Expansion:
We released a Request for Proposal (RFP) for statewide one-on-one
support services. The scope of work outlines requirements for one-on-
one staff, including minimum age, background clearances, training,
crisis intervention skills, and supervision standards. We will oversee
these contracted providers to ensure quality and compliance, with a
target date of December 2025.
Page 15 of 32

--- Page 53 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: Although SSA indicated disagreement with the treatment
foster care rate noted in our analysis, the response does not contradict the facts
presented in the finding. As noted in our analysis, during our audit fieldwork
SSA management advised that many of the children placed in a hotel had needs
that required placement with a treatment foster care provider, rather than a
residential treatment center (RTC) as indicated in SSA’s response. Regardless,
the highest approved rate for RTC ($931) is still significantly less than the daily
cost to provide one-on-one services to children in hotel settings ($1,259).
Accordingly, we believe the information in our analysis is accurate.
Page 16 of 32

--- Page 54 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
SSA did not ensure the LDSSs established and maintained required trust
accounts for foster children.
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure LDSSs establish trust accounts as
required, and
b. periodically review trust account activity to ensure the account balances
are proper.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Children deserve financial security and we are committed to ensuring the
additional comments as children we serve receive the support they deserve. We are working on a
deemed necessary. procurement for a consultant to assist with organizational assessments
and policy revisions, including Special Needs Trust accounts.
This finding was included in the Local Department Operations Audit,
and through that corrective action, we developed a task force composed
of representatives from SSA and Local Departments of Social Services
led by the SSA Executive Director to fully resolve this issue and ensure
we are fully meeting the needs of the children we serve.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2026
Please provide details of We are committed to ensuring the children we serve receive the full
corrective action or support they deserve. We agree with the recommendation to establish
explain disagreement. procedures to ensure LDSSs establish trust accounts as required and will
review and update Policy #19-06, “Protecting the Resources of Children
in Custody.” We will explore whether an improvement can be made in
CJAMS to notify caseworkers to apply for a special needs trust account.
We will then establish bi-annual review procedures for trust accounts
and account activity.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2026
Please provide details of We agree with the recommendation to periodically review trust account
corrective action or activity to ensure account balances are proper by creating a report to pull
explain disagreement. youth account activity. We will establish bi-annual review procedures
for trust accounts and account activity and ensure we are fully
addressing the needs of the youth we serve.
Page 17 of 32

--- Page 55 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
SSA did not have comprehensive procedures to identify and recover
overpayments to public foster care providers, guardians, and adoption
subsidy recipients.
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive procedures including
steps to
a. investigate potential overpayments identified on the CJAMS reports to
determine if funds need to be recovered; and
b. ensure collection of provider overpayments is adequately pursued,
including those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2025
Please provide details of We are committed to identify and recover overpayments to public out-
corrective action or of-home care providers, guardians, and adoption subsidy recipients. We
explain disagreement. will implement internal standards of practice to improve overpayment
monitoring. Our Out-of-Home Team will work with our Data Office and
use existing CJAMS reports to develop and maintain a centralized
tracking spreadsheet to identify payment irregularities. We will review
this spreadsheet monthly to flag issues such as continued payments after
disrupted adoptions or irregular guardianship payments. We will share
identified cases with the appropriate LDSS to initiate overpayment
recovery or suspend payments, as needed.
CJAMS already initiates automatic recoupment for out-of-home care
overpayments. However, we will revise our SOP, “SSA CW #22-07
Adoption Assistance,” to provide updated guidance to LDSSs on
adoption subsidy suspension procedures.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2025
Page 18 of 32

--- Page 56 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of We agree with the recommendation to implement internal procedures
corrective action or that support timely notification to the LDSSs for overpayment
explain disagreement. identification and recovery.
As part of the corrective action, we will establish internal standards of
practice that use existing CJAMS reports to monitor potential
overpayments across out-of-home care, guardianship, and adoption
subsidy payments. We will review the specific cases noted in the audit
finding to determine if recoupment of overpayments is appropriate and
take action accordingly.
Page 19 of 32

--- Page 57 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
SSA did not meet federal foster care service performance requirements
resulting in penalties totaling $698,296 being assessed on the State.
We recommend that SSA take appropriate action to ensure that the State
meets the federal CFSR standards.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We agree that we did not meet the required level of improvement for
additional comments as Children Family Service Review (CFSR) 3 Performance Improvement
deemed necessary. Plan (PIP) measures for Permanency Outcome 1. However, we disagree
with the statement that we did not meet the federal foster care service
performance requirements.
Recommendation 9 Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of We are fully committed to meeting all federal Child and Family Services
corrective action or Review (CFSR) standards. CFSR results are based on sample sizes that
explain disagreement. may not reflect the entirety of statewide practice. We continue to
prioritize meeting these standards and have implemented several
strategies to improve outcomes.
To support compliance with the federal standards under Permanency
Outcome 1, we collaborate closely with the Children’s Bureau and the
Foster Care Court Improvement Program (FCCIP) to identify and
resolve challenges impacting permanency. We conduct monthly case
reviews across local departments to identify trends and strengthen
practices related to permanency. We facilitate regular collaborative
forums, including Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) Network
meetings and Permanency Enhancement Sessions, where we analyze
permanency data and CFSR trends and challenges. These forums bring
together SSA leadership and staff, LDSSs, court partners (including
FCCIP staff, permanency planning liaisons, and attorneys), and
academic and technical assistance partners such as the University of
Maryland School of Social Work and Chapin Hall.
In preparation for the State’s participation in Federal CFSR Round 4 in
October 2025, we are reviewing current performance, improving case
practice, and engaging partners in the planning process for the upcoming
Program Improvement Plan (PIP).
Page 20 of 32

--- Page 58 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: While SSA disagrees with recommendation 9, the
response does not refute our analysis. As explained in our analysis, SSA incurred
penalties totaling $698,296 due to the failure to comply with the federal
performance measure related to ensuring permanent and stable living
arrangements for children in foster care.
Page 21 of 32

--- Page 59 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Child Protective Services
Finding 10
SSA did not sufficiently address instances when LDSSs did not conduct child
abuse and neglect investigations timely.
We recommend that SSA establish effective procedures to ensure that LDSSs
conduct and complete investigations of allegations of child abuse and neglect
in a timely manner, as required by State law, regulation, (repeat) and its
policy.
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10 Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2026
Please provide details of The safety and well-being of the children we serve is our highest
corrective action or priority. We are committed to holding ourselves accountable and
explain disagreement. continuously improving how we serve Maryland’s children.
We agree with the recommendation and are reviewing and improving
our monitoring practice for Child Protective Services (CPS)
investigation timeliness. Our current SOP dictates we monitor the CPS
Milestone report. Since the HB 1248 report went into production in
October 2022, we are drafting a new SOP for monitoring CPS
investigation timeliness using this new report, which includes opened
and closed cases, allowing for more accurate tracking to improve
compliance. We will continue to hold ourselves accountable to keep
children safe.
Page 22 of 32

--- Page 60 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 11
SSA did not report child abuse and neglect investigations that were not
completed within 60 days to the General Assembly as required by State law.
In addition, SSA could not support its explanations for untimely
investigations, certain of which appeared questionable.
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure reports to the General Assembly are
accurate and supported, and
b. provide an updated report to the General Assembly for fiscal year 2024,
as noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The safety and well-being of the children we serve is our highest
additional comments as priority. We respectfully disagree with the analysis for finding 11. We
deemed necessary. do not currently submit a report to the General Assembly concerning
“untimely case closures.” While the Department tracks “untimely initial
contacts” with the alleged victim child and “untimely case closures,” the
quarterly and annual timeliness reports submitted to the legislature are
only statutorily required to contain information on “untimely initial
contacts.”
Recommendation 11a Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of We respectfully disagree with this recommendation. We have
corrective action or established a reporting structure based on the legislative history of
explain disagreement. HB1248/SB820, which amended Maryland Family Law §5-706. The
final version of the bill clarified the tracking requirement for delays to
only include instances where the Local Department of Social Services
(LDSS) failed to “see the child in accordance with the time frames
established under subsection (c).” The Fiscal and Policy Note
accompanying HB1248/SB820 concurred with the Department’s
interpretation of the legislation’s reporting requirements.
The General Assembly’s intent was to receive information on delays in
seeing the child, not on delays in closing cases. The reports we have
submitted since the bill's passage have consistently followed the law,
and the Department has received no feedback or critique from the
Department of Legislative Services to suggest our reports were deficient.
Page 23 of 32

--- Page 61 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 11b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of We respectfully disagree with this recommendation. The quarterly and
corrective action or annual reports that we submitted since the passage of HB1248/SB820
explain disagreement. are accurate and supported by the law, which requires we track and
report delays in seeing the child within the statutory timeframe. The
legislation has never required that our reports include information on
cases that did not close within the 60-day timeframe.
Our previously submitted reports are accurate and align with the
legislative intent of HB1248/SB820. Expanding the scope of the
quarterly and annual reports to include data on all investigations and
reports discussed by Maryland Family Law §5-706 would require
additional financial resources to change the child welfare case
management system. We are fully committed to continuing to provide
accurately and timely reports as defined by the law.
Auditor’s Comment: SSA disagrees with recommendations 11a and 11b. As
indicated in the response, SSA believes that State law does not require it to report
investigations that are not completed within 60 days to the General Assembly. In
this regard, State law clearly requires SSA to “issue a quarterly report identifying
investigations or reports that are not completed within the time frames required by
this section.” Accordingly, we believe that our finding and related
recommendations are accurate and appropriate.
Page 24 of 32

--- Page 62 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 12
SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and
timeliness of Title IV-E eligibility determinations and redeterminations,
resulting in lost federal funds potentially totaling $22.5 million.
We recommend that SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility determinations are completed properly
and timely for all children and pursue federal reimbursement for eligible
expenditures (including those noted above) (repeat); and
b. conduct reviews to ensure that Title IV-E eligibility determinations are
proper, as required by SSA policy (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We do not fully agree with the analysis provided in the audit finding.
additional comments as Federal regulations do not require eligibility determinations to be made
deemed necessary. within 60 days. Rather, they require that courts find “reasonable efforts
to prevent removal” within 60 days of a child's entry into care.
To address the backlog of eligibility determinations, we conducted a
focused review in March 2024 of approximately 1,600 out-of-home care
cases that were pending supervisor approval. As a result of this review,
we generated $5 million in federal reimbursement.
Regarding the timeliness of the 45 initial determinations and 45
redeterminations, we point to our Title IV-E Policy and Procedures
Manual, which states that if the IV-E Specialist has reason to question a
child’s eligibility or reimbursability, the case should remain in
“pending” or “incomplete” status while additional information is
gathered. If documentation is not secured by the 60th day, the case
should be marked ineligible and flagged for follow-up. IV-E staff
conduct annual reviews of ineligible cases to reassess and confirm their
status.
Additionally, we do not use a manual process for determining eligibility.
In accordance with federal requirements, all Title IV-E eligibility
Page 25 of 32

--- Page 63 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
determinations are conducted within Maryland’s statewide automated
child welfare information system (CJAMS).
We remain committed to improving the timeliness and accuracy of
eligibility determinations and will continue to align our system
capabilities with federal guidance.
Recommendation 12a Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2026
Please provide details of We are fully committed to ensure timely eligibility determinations and
corrective action or maximum federal reimbursement. To address the audit finding, we will
explain disagreement. implement the following corrective actions:
1. Develop SSA Internal Standard Operating Procedures (SOP):
We are drafting and implementing an internal SOP specific to Title IV-E
eligibility. This SOP will define case review timelines and formalize the
requirement that initial eligibility determinations be completed within 60
days of case assignment, and redeterminations be conducted annually
from the child’s date of removal. The 60-day timeline reflects the
administrative workflow within CJAMS, including supervisor review
and case assignment.
2. CJAMS Dashboard Enhancements:
We will improve existing CJAMS dashboards to track Title IV-E
eligibility status, reasons for ineligibility, and the timeliness of initial
determinations and redeterminations. This will improve our monitoring
and accountability.
3. Redetermination Alerts:
We will implement an automated alert system within CJAMS to notify
Title IV-E Specialists and supervisors 30 days prior to the
redetermination due date, allowing sufficient time to gather
documentation and complete the review.
These actions will improve our compliance with federal claim
requirements and reduce delays in processing eligibility determinations.
Recommendation 12b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
Please provide details of We are committed to ensuring that Title IV-E eligibility determinations
corrective action or are proper, as required by SSA policy. We will conduct reviews to
explain disagreement. ensure proper and timely determinations through the following
corrective actions:
Page 26 of 32

--- Page 64 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
1. Improving Quality Assurance (QA) Processes:
We will update our existing QA process to align with required
determination timeframes. We will identify the average time it takes to
complete determinations and track trends over time. We will then
implement a QA tool within CJAMS to monitor compliance with case
reviews and automate QA findings for immediate performance feedback.
This will eliminate the need for supervisor approval to reduce delays and
streamline case completion.
2. Improve Monitoring and Training:
We will track compliance trends and identify areas for improvement
across all jurisdictions. To reinforce policy and procedural updates, we
will conduct annual spring Title IV-E refresher training for team
members. We will develop a monthly internal review process to track
regional compliance and coordinate with supervisors to ensure team
members are consistently following our policies.
3. Strengthen Reporting and Claiming:
We will improve Title IV-E reporting capabilities in CJAMS to monitor
the timeliness and accuracy of determinations, and identify cases without
completed determinations and claim IV-E funds within the federally
allowable eight-quarter timeframe. We will review final (eighth) quarter
reports to ensure all eligible claims have been submitted before the
claiming window closes. We will coordinate with the Title IV-E fiscal
team to reconcile missed claims and ensure future eligibility
determinations are aligned with timely claiming.
4. Data System Updates:
We will ensure all remaining migrated cases are fully updated in CJAMS
to support ongoing eligibility tracking and compliance.
We are fully committed to ensuring proper and timely Title IV-E
eligibility determinations. These corrective actions will improve
accountability, reduce delays, and ensure we maximize federal
reimbursement opportunities while maintaining compliance with federal
and state requirements.
Auditor’s Comment: SSA’s response indicated that it does not fully agree with
the analysis because federal regulations do not require eligibility determinations
to be made within 60 days. Our analysis clearly indicates that this requirement is
found in State regulations.
Page 27 of 32

--- Page 65 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 13
SSA did not request federal reimbursement for all eligible qualified
residential treatment placements (QRTP) and evidence-based practices
(EBP) expenditures, resulting in the failure to obtain federal reimbursement
for at least $2.6 million.
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to ensure that federal
reimbursement is obtained for all eligible QRTP and EBP expenditures.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We are fully committed to obtaining federal reimbursement for all
additional comments as eligible Qualified Residential Treatment Program (QRTP) and Evidence-
deemed necessary. Based Practice (EBP) expenditures.
We acknowledge our existing system and documentation challenges
have impacted our ability to fully maximize federal reimbursement for
QRTP and EBP expenditures under the Family First Prevention Services
Act (FFPSA). However, we respectfully disagree with the assertion that
we have not requested a $3.1 million federal reimbursement.
While we have not fully optimized our claiming capacity, we submitted
claims totaling $1,118,634 in federal reimbursement for QRTP
placements. We first submitted these claims in June 2024, which
included retroactive claims dating back to 2022.
Additionally, during the reporting period from December 2023 through
December 2024, we submitted $681,829 in prevention services claims.
These prevention-related claims are submitted quarterly through
Maryland’s CB-496 federal reporting process. Federal reimbursement
claims for calendar year 2025 are being processed and are still under
review.
We remain committed to strengthening our claiming infrastructure and
will continue to implement improvements to ensure timely and accurate
federal reimbursement submissions.
Recommendation 13 Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2027
Page 28 of 32

--- Page 66 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of We are fully committed to ensure that we maximize federal
corrective action or reimbursement for all QRTP and EBP expenditures under the FFPSA.
explain disagreement. To address the finding, we are implementing the following strategies:
1. Evidence-Based Practices (EBPs):
Expert Analysis and Strategy Development:
We contracted a subject matter expert (PKG) to conduct a
comprehensive analysis of our practices, system processes, and
documentation procedures. PKG will make recommendations to improve
our capacity to maximize federal claims for EBP services.
CJAMS Provider Portal Development
We are developing a Provider Portal within CJAMS to allow service
providers to directly enter service data, track service delivery, and
document associated costs per child. This will streamline data collection
and support accurate and timely claims. We aim to complete this in FY
2027.
Automated Claiming Tracker
We are implementing a system to automate the monthly review of
potentially claimable children. The tracker will:
● Monitor required documentation,
● Alert local departments of missing or incomplete federal data in
real time, and
● Ensure proper case documentation to support reimbursement
claims.
● This system will be implemented in January 2026.
Contract Standardization for Monitoring:
We are exploring strategies to onboard all locally managed FFPSA-
supporting contracts into the statewide agreements we manage. This
shift will allow for consistent oversight, monitoring, and federal
claiming requirement alignment across all jurisdictions.
2. Qualified Residential Treatment Programs (QRTPs)
To maximize claiming for QRTPs, we will increase the number of
providers with QRTP designation and increase the number of Qualified
Individuals who complete the required assessments under FFPSA. We
will improve CJAMs to help LDSSs complete required document
verification and ensure compliance with eligibility requirements for
claiming reimbursements in January 2026.
Page 29 of 32

--- Page 67 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
We published a Statement of Need in June 2025 to attract residential
child care providers, emphasizing QRTP requirements. We plan an
Expression of Interest in Fall 2025 focused on expanding QRTP
capacity. We are also exploring regionalized Qualified Individual
staffing to expand statewide coverage.
We are revising SSA Policy #21-07 to include guidance on assessments
for continued QRTP placements beyond six or 12 months, depending on
the youth’s age. This will assist with continued claiming efforts.
We are also facilitating monthly collaborative meetings with QIs to
review practice standards, documentation protocols, and claiming
procedures. We meet monthly with IV-E staff to resolve questions and
support accurate claims for QRTP placements.
We are committed to strengthening our systems, guidance, and staffing
to support a full implementation of FFPSA and ensure that all eligible
expenditures are properly documented and claimed for federal
reimbursement.
Auditor’s Comment: SSA’s response indicates that it disagrees with our
analysis that it did not request $3.1 million in federal reimbursement because it
requested reimbursement for approximately $1.1 million in QRTP claims dating
back to 2022. SSA could not provide us with documentation to support that these
amounts specifically related to the amounts we tested. Given that QRTP
expenditures during this period totaled $51.1 million, SSA’s response raises new
concerns that the total federal funds not recovered by SSA significantly exceeds
the amount identified by our audit.
Page 30 of 32

--- Page 68 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Interagency Agreements
Finding 14
SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university for
three interagency agreements were adequately supported, were reasonable in
relation to the tasks performed, and were made in accordance with the terms
of the agreements.
We recommend that SSA
a. implement a process to ensure the propriety of State university invoices.
For example, obtain and review payroll records or restructure the
agreements to base payment on specific deliverables to be monitored by
SSA, or a combination thereof (repeat); and
b. ensure all staffing changes are documented and approved.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 14a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2026
Please provide details of We agree with the recommendation and will hold ourselves accountable
corrective action or to improve oversight of payments and performance under interagency
explain disagreement. agreements with State universities. To strengthen fiscal accountability
and alignment with contract expectations, we are transitioning to
deliverable-based contracts beginning with the three reviewed under this
audit.
Over the next four to six months, we will work with university partners,
our Attorney General’s office, and the Office of Contracts and
Procurement to restructure current agreements to include clear
deliverables, timelines, and payment terms tied to the completion of
those deliverables. We will also develop internal procedures to monitor
progress and ensure payments are made based on satisfactory work.
Page 31 of 32

--- Page 69 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
These changes are expected to be completed by February 2026, with
periodic internal reviews to ensure their compliance and effectiveness.
Recommendation 14b Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2025
Please provide details of Our Contracts Unit will issue written notification to all university
corrective action or partners and Program Monitors to maintain accountability in the
explain disagreement. administration of Interagency Agreements and ensure continued
compliance with contract terms. This notification will reiterate the
contractual requirement for prior approval before any key personnel
changes.
Page 32 of 32

--- Page 70 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Johanna K. Bachman
Jammie A. Brown
Zoe D. Smith
Brian M. Webbert, CIA
Staff Auditors