Title: Somerset County Public Schools
Date: 2025-10-01
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68dedfec4773bf3dc68ae86b
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:13:52.755534
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Somerset County Public Schools
October 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 1, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Somerset
County Public Schools (SCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether SCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that SCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive. Specifically, the procurement policies did not require Board
approval for certain contracts or establish a dollar threshold for Board approval,
and did not require formal written contracts. In addition, the policies did not
incorporate certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices for
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Furthermore, SCPS did not always publish contract solicitations or awards on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required by State law and did not always
prepare written justification for sole source procurements, certain of which did not
appear justified. Similar concerns with the procurement policies and procedures
have been included but not corrected from one or more prior reports dating back
to March 2010.
Our review also disclosed that SCPS awarded a sole source contract for a school
bus safety camera system instead of conducting a competitive procurement. We
also noted that certain components of the payments to bus contractors could not
be supported, a condition identified in our prior audit but not corrected.
Additionally, SCPS did not audit or adequately monitor the performance of its
third-party administrator that provides health care claims processing services, a
condition identified in our two prior audits but not corrected.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
SCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of SCPS’ response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to our findings and
related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by SCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 9
External Audits 10
Cybersecurity Incident 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Revenue and Billing Cycle 13
Federal Funds 14
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 1 – Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS)’ Bidding and 16
Purchasing Policy was not comprehensive.
Finding 2 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 17
practices were not incorporated into SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing
Policy and were not consistently used when participating in an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Finding 3 – SCPS did not execute formal written contracts for certain 19
special education services.
* Finding 4 – SCPS did not always publish contract solicitations or awards 19
on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage and did not always prepare
written justifications for sole source procurements, certain of which
did not appear justified.
Human Resources and Payroll 21
Equipment Control and Accountability 21
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 22
Transportation Services
∗ Finding 8 – SCPS could not support the maintenance costs paid to the 24
bus contractors, improperly paid for excise and fuel tax, and did not
have provisions to audit the contractors to verify key contract terms.
Finding 9 – SCPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus safety 25
camera system instead of conducting a competitive procurement.
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 26
Food Services 26
School Board Oversight 27
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 11 – SCPS did not obtain and review claims data or verify the 28
eligibility of enrolled dependents and did not adequately monitor the
performance of its third-party administrator.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 30
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS)
ranks 23rd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2024 full-time student enrollment was 2,894 students. SCPS had 9
schools, consisting of 4 elementary, 1 middle school, 2 high schools, 1 technology
and career center, and 1 alternative learning school.1
Funding
SCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State, Somerset
County, and federal government. According to the SCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $73.2 million in
fiscal year 2024, including $46.2 million from the State. See Figure 1 for SCPS’
enrollment and funding by source for the six-year period from fiscal year 2019
through fiscal year 2024. See Figure 2 for revenue sources per enrolled student in
fiscal year 2024 according to its audited financial statements.
1 SCPS had 10 schools prior to July 2023. The Board approved the closure of Ewell Elementary
School, located on Smith Island, for the 2023 – 2024 school year and the reopening of the school
if the student population increases. We were advised by SCPS personnel that the school
remained closed for the 2024 – 2025 school year.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
SCPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2019 through 2024
(dollar amounts in millions)
2,930
2,905
2,894
2,818 2,741 2,773
$58
$46
$43 $43 $42 $44
$17 $17
$14
$11 $8 $7 $11 $11 $10 $11 $11 $10
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Enrollment State Local Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2024 included:
• $41.3. million for Foundation Formula Grants
• $2.7 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
• $2.2 million for Other State funding
Source: SCPS’ Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
SCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2024
Other
$324
1%
Local
$3,550
14%
Federal State
$5,410 $16,006
22% 63%
Source: SCPS’ Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.2 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty Aid, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides
2 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
additional funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as
Prekindergarten Aid).
Expenditures
According to SCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2024 expenditures
were approximately $74 million. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 73 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2024. According to MSDE records, during
the 2023-2024 school year, SCPS had 600 full-time equivalent positions, which
consisted of 403 instructional and 197 non-instructional positions. Instruction
accounted for 56 percent of SCPS’ expenditures on a categorical basis (see Figure
3).
Figure 3
SCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2024
(dollar amounts in millions)
Instruction $41.4
56%
Adminis tration and S upport $11.2
15%
Enrollment
Facilities and Capital Projects $8.4 2,894
11%
Special Education $6.2 Employees
8%
600
Transportation $4.0
6% Cost Per Pupil
Food Service $2.8
$25,564
4%
Source: SCPS' Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
8

--- Page 11 ---
Oversight
SCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and two non-voting student members. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of SCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with SCPS to comply with
the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Somerset County government
also exercises authority over SCPS primarily through the review and approval of
SCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a seven-member
Board appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
Board Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker
of the House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, MSDE, and the Interagency Commission on School
Construction. Specifically, the law provides that the OIGE may receive and
investigate information and complaints concerning potential fraud, waste, and
abuse of public funds and property; civil rights violations involving students or
employees; whether policies and procedures governing the prevention and
reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with applicable federal and State
laws; and compliance with other applicable federal and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
9

--- Page 12 ---
review, the OIGE issued one public report related to SCPS reviews and
investigations. We considered the report during our current audit.
External Audits
As required by State law, SCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of SCPS as of June 30, 2019, 2020,
2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024, and the respective changes in its financial position
and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
SCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of SCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independent audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
SCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance
to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the
entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2019 through 2024 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2024 audits, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the
following areas:
• State and local government revenues received via electronic fund transfer
• Accounts receivable
• Federal grant activity
10

--- Page 13 ---
Cybersecurity Incident
On December 28, 2024, an SCPS vendor became aware of a cybersecurity
incident involving the unauthorized transfers of current and former student and
educator personal information. The breach effected numerous vendor customers
including other Maryland school districts. Compromised information included
names, contact information, birthdates, medical information, and social security
numbers. The vendor had obtained an independent review over its controls in
2024 and its related System and Organization Controls report did not identify any
significant operational or security-related concerns.
SCPS learned their information was involved in the breach on January 7, 2025
and alerted the students and educators about the security breach on January 10,
2025. The vendor also reached out directly to individuals affected by the breach
and is offering credit monitoring services to those impacted.
On March 7, 2025 the vendor released an investigation report sharing attack
details but did not include the number of records or how many customers were
affected. As of July 2025 the vendor’s incident investigation was still ongoing
and SCPS has received no further details about its affected data.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, SCPS obtained an
exemption on December 6, 2016 from the 6-year audit cycle covering fiscal years
2017 to 2022. Therefore, our most recent audit report was dated September 15,
2014. Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our
audit objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 14 of the
16 findings contained in the September 15, 2014 report. See Figure 4 on the
following page for the results of our review.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Collections were not always deposited timely nor Not repeated
Finding 1
adequately secured prior to deposit. (Not followed up on)
SCPS lacked written policies and procedures for Not repeated
Finding 2
controlling student activity funds. (Not followed up on)
Finding 3 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
SCPS’ procurement policies generally did not require
Repeated
Finding 4 Board approval for certain purchases and did not
(Current Finding 1)
address contractual services.
Contracts were frequently not awarded through
Repeated
Finding 5 competitive procurements and payment processing was
(Current Finding 4)
not always adequate.
Finding 6 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
Documentation was lacking that the Board possessed all
Finding 7 pertinent information prior to approving an employee Not repeated
termination settlement agreement.
Equipment policies were not comprehensive and
Finding 8 Not repeated
disposals were not approved.
Finding 9 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
Finding 10 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
Certain construction related goods and services were Repeated
Finding 11
procured without obtaining competitive bids. (Current Finding 4)
Certain payments to transportation contractors were not Repeated
Finding 12
based on market conditions or actual costs. (Current Finding 8)
SCPS did not ensure the accuracy of data used to
Finding 13 Not repeated
compute certain payments to bus contractors.
Finding 14 Invoices were not adequately verified prior to payment. Not repeated
Financial disclosure statements were not always filed as
Finding 15 Not repeated
required.
SCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for Repeated
Finding 16
certain employee and retiree health care costs. (Current Finding 11)
3 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
have been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from the State, Somerset County, and the federal government.
According to SCPS' audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled approximately $73.2 million in fiscal year 2024, including approximately
$46.2 million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited SCPS' financial statements and the objectives
of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via
electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor's
procedural review (related to the fiscal year 2024 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2024, school
activity collections totaled $688,000 and the June 30, 2024 fund balance was
$328,000. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of this activity,
we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Federal Funds
Background
SCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are generally
restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch Program or
Special Education). According to SCPS' Single Audit, fiscal year 2024 (latest
available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled $15.2 million, not
including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid
reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $6.3 million in fiscal year 2020 to $15.2 million in
fiscal year 2024 (141 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
Specifically, according to SCPS' records, as of September 30, 2024 SCPS was
awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $24.3 million to be
distributed over federal fiscal years 2021 to 2024 under Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental
Appropriations Act, and the American Recovery Plan.
As of September 30, 2024, according to SCPS records expenditures related to
these COVID-19 grants totaled $22.1 million from July 2020 through August
2024 and were primarily comprised of staffing, laptops, instructional software and
materials, technology and infrastructure upgrades. On March 28, 2025, the
United States Department of Education (DOE) notified every State that it was
ending the liquidation period for COVID-19 grants effective immediately. The
DOE notification indicated that it would consider an extension to the liquidation
period on an individual project specific basis. SCPS advised us that it had
approximately $177,000 in COVID-19 grants that had not been liquidated as of
June 24, 2025. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) indicated
that it was working with the Office of the Attorney General regarding appropriate
legal action as of May 13, 2025.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of SCPS' federal grants and the objectives of our audit
in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on SCPS compliance with the
terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal
control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant
expenditures) for fiscal years 2019 through 2024. Our review of the Single
Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in this report.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
SCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to SCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
MSDE's Interagency Medicaid Monitoring Team issued a report in April 2024 of
the results of its review of 40 student case files for 87 criteria. The report did not
specifically address the propriety of Medicaid billing but overall concluded that
SCPS was generally compliant with most criteria. For example, SCPS was 100
percent compliant with 70 criteria and from 90 to 99 percent compliant with 7
criteria.
According to SCPS records, fiscal year 2024 state and federal reimbursements for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $493,000, which was an
increase of $66,000 from the previous fiscal year. Based on our current
assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives, our audit did
not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in the federal fund area, including policies, procedures and controls
with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and SCPS’ records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $20.1 million during fiscal year 2024. SCPS uses a
financial management system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are
created in the system by departments and are subject to on-line departmental
approvals. Purchase orders are prepared in the system by the finance department
based on approved requisitions. The finance, transportation and facilities
departments handle the solicitation, bid evaluation, and establishment of
contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable department
before being forwarded to the requesting school or department for approval as
necessary. Once approved, the accounts payable department enters the invoice
into the financial management system. The system matches the invoice to the
related purchase order then prints the vendor checks, which are manually matched
15

--- Page 18 ---
to appropriate purchasing and receiving documents before mailing and then posts
the payment to the financial records.
Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that procurements equal to or exceeding $100,000 (prior to October 1,
2023, the amount was $50,000) be competitively bid. As noted in Finding 1,
SCPS’ procurement policy did not require all procurements of contracts and
agreements be approved by the Somerset County Board of Education (Board).
Rather, only procurements of contracts and agreements for facility improvements
and equipment required Board approval.
Finding 1
SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing Policy was not comprehensive.
Analysis
SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing Policy was not comprehensive. For example, the
Policy did not require Board approval for contractual services, special education
services, or intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements, and did not
establish dollar thresholds for Board approval. Additionally, the Policy did not
require written contracts. Written contracts set forth all financial terms and
conditions, define the duties and responsibilities of the parties, protect each party
in the event of default, and provide other critical terms for items such as
resolution of disputes, termination for convenience, and retention of records.
Findings 2 through 4 highlight additional conditions that were caused in part due
to SCPS’ lack of a comprehensive Bidding and Purchasing Policy. According to
SCPS’ records, during fiscal year 2024 it paid 53 vendors individually more than
$50,000, totaling approximately $17.6 million.
Similar conditions regarding SCPS procurement policies not having a dollar
threshold requiring Board approval and addressing the various types of
procurements were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating
back to March 2010. A similar condition regarding SCPS procurement policies
not requiring written contracts was commented upon in our preceding audit report
dated September 2014. In response to our preceding report, SCPS stated it would
establish formal dollar thresholds requiring Board approval and agreed that
written contracts should be acquired to document the agreed upon terms but
disagreed that the Policy should be updated to address contractual services. As
noted above, SCPS did not implement the related recommendations, and we
continue to believe that the Policy should address contractual services.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SCPS revise its Bidding and Purchasing Policy to
a. address all categories of purchases and establish formal dollar thresholds
requiring Board approval for all purchases, such as contracts exceeding
$100,000 (repeat); and
b. require written contracts to document agreed upon terms (repeat).
Finding 2
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing Policy and were not
consistently used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPAs).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing Policy and were not
consistently used by SCPS when participating in an ICPA.4 State law, which
legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is applicable to local
education agencies, provides for the participation in an existing State or local
contract, if the governing body of the entity determines that (a) participation
would provide a cost savings in purchase price or administrative burden; or (b)
further other policy goals including operational and energy–efficiency goals
related to the purchase, operation, or maintenance of the supply or service.
Our review of the SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing Policy disclosed that the above
statutory requirements. as well as the following critical best practices were not
included:
• Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
• Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs;
• Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties;
4 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a
certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract and at
least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings
that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to
all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that local education agencies do not need
to conduct competitive procurements for goods and commodities if they use a contract awarded by
public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing organizations and the originating procuring
agency followed public bidding procedures.
17

--- Page 20 ---
• Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised; and obtaining originating agency’s competitive procurement
documentation (including public advertisements and proposal
evaluations);
• Verify terms, scope of services, specifications and price meet our needs;
• Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
• Obtain a copy of ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification.
We could not obtain the total number or value of contracts awarded via ICPAs,
since SCPS did not capture this information. Based on our review of material
payments to vendors, we tested SCPS’ participation in 12 ICPAs during fiscal
years 2019 through 2025. Nine of these ICPAs had contract award amounts
totaling $3.3 million and three did not have a contract award amount, since they
were contracts to purchase equipment or supplies at discounted prices with
indefinite quantities. According to SCPS records, payments on these 12 contracts
totaled approximately $4.3 million during fiscal year 2024. Our test disclosed
that SCPS could not document that it adhered to the statutory requirements and
did not adhere to some of the aforementioned best practices in the ICPAs tested.
For example, SCPS did not analyze the costs of conducting competitive
solicitations or research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs for any of the
ICPAs tested. Incorporating ICPA best practices into SCPS procurement policies
could help ensure they are consistently used.
Furthermore, for 8 of the 12 ICPAs tested with payments totaling $2.4 million
during fiscal years 2023 and 2024, SCPS had not obtained a copy of the contract
pricing for invoice verification. We were able to verify the pricing for 6 of 8
ICPAs tested with payments totaling approximately $1.1 million. We were
unable to verify the pricing for the remaining 2 ICPAs tested with payments
totaling approximately $1.3 million.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require actions included in the aforementioned list.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SCPS
a. incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirements and other
identified and acknowledged best practices into its Bidding and
Purchasing Policy,
18

--- Page 21 ---
b. ensure that the performance of the requirements and best practices are
documented when evaluating and participating in ICPAs, and
c. maintain a comprehensive list of all contracts awarded under an ICPA.
Finding 3
SCPS did not execute formal written contracts for certain special education
services.
Analysis
SCPS did not execute formal written contracts for certain special education
services. SCPS provides special education services in accordance with the
individualized education program developed for each student. According to
SCPS’ records, it paid four MSDE certified non-public schools approximately
$514,000 for special education services between July 1, 2018 and December 31,
2024.
Our review disclosed that SCPS did not have a contract with these four non-
public schools. Although not specifically required by its Bidding and Purchasing
Policy as previously noted in Finding 1, written contracts set forth all financial
terms and conditions, define the duties and responsibilities of the parties, protect
each party in the event of default, and provide other critical terms for items such
as resolution of disputes, termination for convenience, and retention of records.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SCPS require formal written contracts for special
education services.
Finding 4
SCPS did not always publish contract solicitations or awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) and did not always prepare written
justifications for sole source procurements, certain of which did not appear
justified.
Analysis
SCPS did not always publish contract solicitations or awards on eMMA and did
not always prepare written justification for sole source procurements, certain of
which did not appear justified. Furthermore, SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing
Policy did not require publication of contract solicitations and awards on eMMA,
as required by State law. Rather, the Policy only required solicitations and to be
posted in local newspapers. State law requires the solicitation and award of
19

--- Page 22 ---
contracts of $100,000 or more (prior to October 1, 2023 the amount was $50,000)
procured by public schools after July 1, 2022 to be published on eMMA.5
Based on our review of material vendor payments, we tested five sole source
procurements and one competitive procurement totaling $1.2 million which
disclosed that SCPS did not publish all six awards or the solicitation of the one
competitive procurement on eMMA as required by State law. Publishing
solicitations and awards on eMMA provides transparency over State
procurements, including information about winning bidders and the amount of the
related awards.
Additionally, SCPS did not prepare written justifications for the sole source
procurements to support its determination that the awarded price was fair and
reasonable. Our review disclosed that other vendors were available that provided
similar services or goods for three of the five procurements (custodial supplies for
$194,000, a roof repair and replacement for $204,000, and the installation of new
doors for $98,000) and therefore should have been competitively bid.6 SCPS’
Bidding and Purchasing Policy requires documentation be submitted to the
Superintendent on an approval form to justify the rationale used in determining
the vendor was the sole source, as well as the determination that the awarded
price is fair and reasonable.
A similar condition regarding not publishing contract solicitations and awards on
eMMA, as well as a lack of competitive bidding, was commented upon in our
preceding audit report. In response to that report, SCPS stated it would develop a
procedure to ensure eMMA was used and that procurements would be
competitively bid when applicable. However, as noted above, SCPS did not
implement the corrective actions.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SCPS
a. revise and implement its Bidding and Purchasing Policy to require the
publication of contract solicitations and awards on eMMA as required,
including posting the contracts noted above (repeat);
b. ensure that sole source contract justifications are prepared as required;
and
c. obtain goods and services through a documented competitive
procurement process when applicable (such as, when other vendors can
5 eMMA is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
6 In addition to the five sole source procurements we tested, as noted in Finding 9, SCPS also did
not use a competitive procurement process to obtain a school bus camera safety program and did
not prepare a written sole source justification.
20

--- Page 23 ---
provide the goods and services) to ensure the awarded price is fair and
reasonable (repeat).
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the SCPS budget.
According to SCPS' records, fiscal year 2024 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $53.9 million, representing 73 percent of total expenditures.
According to MSDE reports, during the 2023-2024 school year, SCPS had 600
full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 403 instructional and 197 non-
instructional positions.
SCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of SCPS’ internal control over the human resources and payroll areas of
operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to SCPS' audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, and equipment) totaled $4.1
million as of June 30, 2024. SCPS maintains centralized automated records for
all equipment including assets with a cost of $5,000 or more that are capitalized
for financial statement purposes. Control and recordkeeping of laptop computers
assigned to schools, students, and employees was maintained in a database by the
Department of Information Technology regardless of cost. SCPS has established
written equipment policies.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of SCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for equipment.
Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 5 through 7
related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article,
Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with SCPS’ responses, have been
redacted from this report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
SCPS employs a staff of 46 employees to maintain its 9 schools and an
administrative and support office. According to SCPS’ fiscal year 2026 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to SCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated to cost
$177.3 million.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Our review of nine construction-related procurements awarded during fiscal years
2022 through 2024 totaling $2.4 million,7 disclosed various issues with SCPS
purchasing policy and procedures and certain of these procurements that were
addressed in other findings in this report. Our test of 16 invoices totaling $1.7
million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were generally properly
supported, reviewed and approved, and the amounts invoiced were in accordance
with contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
SCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, SCPS provides scheduled maintenance of its
buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing emergency repairs. In
addition, SCPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore area entities
to purchase energy at the best possible terms. SCPS also utilizes a vendor energy
management program to monitor and control heating and air conditioning usage
and a utility billing management system to monitor related costs.
SCPS also has written policies that include best practices that encourage both
students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use, and monitors
building energy on a centralized basis. According to consortium records (which
we did not audit), SCPS saved approximately $1 million through energy cost
avoidance from fiscal years 2015 to 2024.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of SCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for facilities
construction, renovations, and maintenance. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by MSDE, SCPS had approximately 2,800
students eligible to receive student transportation services during fiscal year 2024.
These students were transported using 31 contractor-owned buses and 1
contractor owned boat (for transporting students residing on an island). SCPS
reported that 787,000 route miles were traveled to transport students for the 2023-
2024 school year. According to SCPS’ records, fiscal year 2024 transportation
7 Two procurements did not have an award amount since they were purchases of services at
discounted prices with indefinite quantities.
23

--- Page 26 ---
costs totaled $4 million, of which $3 million (approximately 75 percent) were
payments for contracted bus services for various costs and $125,000 for boat
services.
School Bus Safety Camera Program
As allowed by State and County law, SCPS contracted for the use of school bus
safety cameras to monitor drivers who illegally pass a stopped school bus and
entered into a memorandum of understanding with the Somerset County Sheriff’s
Office to process citations and receive SCPS’ share of the program revenue. In
February 2022, SCPS executed a five-year sole-source contract (with a five-year
renewal option) to a vendor to install and operate bus safety cameras that would
be owned and maintained by the vendor on SCPS’ contracted school buses. The
contract also provided for internal cameras to monitor the conduct of drivers and
students inside the bus.
Finding 8
SCPS could not support the maintenance costs paid to the bus contractors,
improperly paid for excise and fuel tax, and did not have provisions to audit
the contractors to verify key contract terms.
Analysis
SCPS could not support the maintenance costs paid to the bus contractors,
improperly paid for excise and fuel tax, and did not have provisions to audit the
contractors to verify key contract terms.
• SCPS could not support the propriety of the bus contractors per-mile bus
maintenance costs ($0.85 per mile), totaling approximately $669,000 during
fiscal year 2024. This rate is intended to fund the expenses incurred by the
bus contractors for maintaining the bus, but no cost data was compiled and
analyzed to determine what should be reimbursed.
• SCPS did not exclude federal excise and State fuel taxes from payments to
bus contractors. SCPS pays contractors for fuel usage using a monthly
average of diesel fuel prices, including taxes, and dividing by a miles per
gallon rate by SCPS. However, according to federal and State law, SCPS
contractors are exempt from the federal excise tax and State fuel tax and are
able to receive a credit for fuel taxes paid when they file their income tax
returns. If SCPS had considered the exemption amount in its calculation,
payments to the contractors would have been approximately $409,000 lower
for fiscal years 2019 through 2024.
24

--- Page 27 ---
• The standard contract language used by SCPS for its bus contracts did not
include a right to audit provision. Such a provision would allow SCPS to
verify the contractors’ actual costs. The State of Maryland has established a
preference in regulation that all contracts require contractors to make their
records available for audit by authorized representatives of the State at all
reasonable times. Further, the use of audited cost data in negotiations is a best
practice for federal contracts and is recommended by certain consulting firms.
Similar conditions regarding maintenance cost components and fuel excise taxes
were commented upon in our preceding audit report dated September 2014.
SCPS’ response to our preceding report indicated that corrective actions would be
implemented to address our recommendations; however, SCPS did not take the
corrective actions as indicated.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SCPS
a. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs or otherwise develop supportable cost
estimates as the basis for per mile maintenance costs (repeat),
b. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments (repeat), and
c. include a provision to audit the bus contractors in future contracts.
Finding 9
SCPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus safety camera system
instead of conducting a competitive procurement.
Analysis
SCPS awarded a school bus safety camera contract without soliciting bids for the
contract or considering similar contracts competitively procured by other school
systems. Our audits of other Maryland local education agencies (LEAs) noted
other vendors that provide bus safety cameras and at least one LEA has awarded a
similar contract using a competitive bidding process. SCPS management advised
us that it believed the vendor was the only one offering the technology at no cost
to SCPS. However, SCPS did not prepare a justification or have any other
documentation to support this assertion as required by its Bidding and Purchasing
Policy.
The contract provided the monthly citation revenue would be disbursed 60
percent to the vendor and 40 percent to the County after deduction of the monthly
technology fees of $175 per bus from gross citation revenue. SCPS has not
received any of the $155,280 in collected revenues for the first 32 months of the
25

--- Page 28 ---
program’s operation (from May 1, 2022 through December 31, 2024). The
citation revenue during this period was not sufficient to cover $172,117 of the
technology fees as of December 31, 2024. The difference in these amounts will
be offset against future citation revenue.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that SCPS adhere to statutory requirements for competitive
bidding for future bus safety camera contract procurements.
We determined that Finding 10 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with SCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Food Services
Background
According to SCPS' audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled approximately $2.8 million in fiscal year 2024, and were
primarily funded with federal and State funds totaling $2.5 million. The federal
funds are received from the United States Department of Agriculture based on an
established rate per meals served. SCPS is allowed to retain federal funds it
receives in excess of its annual food service operating costs to be used to offset
certain future food service operating costs. According to SCPS' audited financial
statements, the balance in SCPS' Food Services Fund totaled approximately
$744,000 as of June 30, 2024.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to Food Services financial area of operations.
26

--- Page 29 ---
School Board Oversight
Background
The Somerset County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five elected
members and two non-voting student representatives. The Board contracted with
a certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits of the SCPS
financial statements and federal programs. The Board has not established any
committees, including a Citizens Advisory Council, to assist in its oversight of
various areas of SCPS operation and governance. A Citizens Advisory Council is
a structured group that provides advice to the Board on certain issues and is
required by State law.
SCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both
Board members and SCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, appointed officials (such as the
Superintendent), and other administrators (such as supervisors, school principals,
and agency buyers) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, SCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
three members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and SCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar years 2022 and 2023, disclosed that all forms were generally submitted
as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions in the school board oversight
area.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
SCPS is a member of the Eastern Shore of Maryland Consortium for employee
and retiree health care. The Consortium members are self-insured for healthcare
costs up to a designated stop-loss amount of $250,000 per participant per plan
year. The Consortium contracts with a third-party administrator (TPA) for health
27

--- Page 30 ---
care claims processing services for employee medical (including prescription
costs), dental and vision, and for stop-loss insurance coverage. The TPA bills
SCPS monthly subscription charges based on the number of participants and their
medical coverage. Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them
on behalf of SCPS. SCPS pays its TPA an administrative fee for these services.
As of June 18, 2025, SCPS provided health insurance benefits to 1,395 enrolled
employees, dependents, and retirees. According to the TPA’s records for the plan
year ended August 31, 2024, SCPS healthcare expenditures totaled approximately
$6 million, administrative fees totaled $232,000, and stop-loss insurance coverage
totaled $604,000.
Finding 11
SCPS did not obtain and review claims data or verify the eligibility of
enrolled dependents and did not adequately monitor the performance of its
TPA.
Analysis
SCPS did not obtain and review claims data or verify the eligibility of enrolled
dependents and did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA.
• SCPS did not obtain support for the 2023 and 2024 annual medical claim
settlements to the TPA which totaled $227,068 and $292,884, respectively. In
a year-end settlement process, the TPA compares the medical claims it paid
against the monthly subscription charges paid by SCPS to determine any
excess amount due from or to be reimbursed. Our review disclosed that SCPS
did not receive detailed claims data from the TPA to verify the propriety of
the settlement amount.
• SCPS did not obtain documentation to ensure all enrolled dependents were
eligible to participate in the SCPS health plan or perform periodic audits to
ensure enrolled dependents were still eligible. SCPS employees must submit
documentation (such as birth certificates) for dependents they want added to
their health plan. Our test of 15 arbitrarily selected employees8 with
dependent insurance coverage, disclosed that 3 employees had not provided
the required documentation to support the eligibility of 4 of their dependents.
For example, three employees each did not provide supporting documentation
(such as marriage certificates) for their spouses who were dependents on their
plan.
8 Test selection was made from a report of all employees as of December 2024 and we
selected employees hired between November 2022 and October 2024.
28

--- Page 31 ---
• SCPS did not audit, or otherwise verify, the accuracy of TPA self-reported
compliance with performance measures. The TPA health care contract
included 18 performance measures relating to implementation, network
maintenance, customer service, and claims processing. Additionally, the
contract allowed for the assessment of penalties up to $291,000 annually, if
the TPA did not meet the performance measures. The medical TPA reported
self-assessed penalties of $8,432 in plan year 2022 - 2023 based on its
reported compliance, but SCPS did not have a process to verify the TPA’s
reported compliance.
A similar condition regarding verifying the eligibility of dependents was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to March 2010
and the lack of detailed claims data was noted in our preceding audit report. In
response to our prior report, SCPS agreed to implement additional controls to
verify amounts paid for health insurance. However, as stated above the controls
were not implemented.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that SCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and any
additional information on the year-end settlement (repeat);
b. obtain documentation to verify the eligibility of dependents claimed by
enrolled health care program participants (repeat); and
c. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Somerset County Public Schools
(SCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which generally
requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school systems to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management practices. In
accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, SCPS obtained an
exemption from the 6-year audit cycle covering fiscal years 2017 to 2022. This
performance audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the SCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the SCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of SCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas included revenue
and billing; federal funds; procurement and disbursements; human resources and
payroll; equipment control; information technology security and control;
facilities; transportation; food services; school board oversight; and the
management of other risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on SCPS dated September 15,
2014, was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope
for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the SCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
30

--- Page 33 ---
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by SCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
SCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of SCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2022 to December 31, 2024.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
SCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the SCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
SCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
31

--- Page 34 ---
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
SCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to SCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from January 2025 to June 2025. SCPS’ response to
our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report.
Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity
findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise SCPS regarding the results of our review of its response.
32

--- Page 35 ---
(cid:36)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:49)(cid:39)(cid:44)(cid:59)
(cid:3)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:18)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:16)(cid:11)(cid:15)(cid:17)(cid:18)(cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:4)(cid:9)(cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:18) (cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:9)(cid:14)(cid:18)
(cid:25)(cid:53)(cid:6)(cid:64)(cid:22)(cid:59)(cid:36)(cid:64)(cid:33)(cid:36)(cid:56)(cid:45)(cid:40)(cid:53)(cid:4)(cid:30)(cid:43)(cid:57)(cid:38)(cid:42)(cid:40)(cid:46)(cid:46)(cid:64) (cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:12)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)
(cid:3)(cid:27)(cid:22)(cid:9)(cid:23)(cid:13)(cid:19)(cid:25)(cid:9)(cid:20)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:28)(cid:4)(cid:7)(cid:12)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:28) (cid:30)(cid:36)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:42)(cid:40)(cid:60)(cid:64)(cid:29)(cid:36)(cid:50)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:39)(cid:1)(cid:64)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:23)(cid:18)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:28)
(cid:22)(cid:50)(cid:39)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:60)(cid:64)(cid:27)(cid:46)(cid:40)(cid:36)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:2)(cid:64)(cid:5)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:28)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:23)(cid:18)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:28)
(cid:34)(cid:53)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:40)(cid:64)(cid:23)(cid:36)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:48)(cid:62)(cid:64) (cid:30)(cid:36)(cid:53)(cid:62)(cid:64)(cid:23)(cid:40)(cid:57)(cid:42)(cid:64)(cid:23)(cid:51)(cid:63)(cid:49)(cid:36)(cid:50)(cid:64)
(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:23)(cid:9)(cid:7)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:21)(cid:11)(cid:28)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:12)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:28) (cid:35)(cid:43)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:43)(cid:36)(cid:48)(cid:64)(cid:30)(cid:38)(cid:44)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:58)(cid:54)(cid:64)
(cid:28)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:50)(cid:64)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:37)(cid:40)(cid:53)(cid:57)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:64)
(cid:54)(cid:77)(cid:143)(cid:165)(cid:77)(cid:125)(cid:64)(cid:78)(cid:147)(cid:194)(cid:25)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:194)(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:194)
(cid:46)(cid:148)(cid:10)(cid:194)(cid:33)(cid:147)(cid:101)(cid:60)(cid:130)(cid:194)(cid:54)(cid:11)(cid:194)(cid:55)(cid:60)(cid:130)(cid:77)(cid:130)(cid:4)(cid:194)(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:3)(cid:194)(cid:35)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:194)
(cid:45)(cid:77)(cid:92)(cid:101)(cid:158)(cid:118)(cid:60)(cid:166)(cid:102)(cid:186)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:32)(cid:180)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:167)(cid:138)(cid:149)(cid:194)
(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:103)(cid:67)(cid:78)(cid:194)(cid:138)(cid:86)(cid:194)(cid:44)(cid:77)(cid:93)(cid:104)(cid:158)(cid:119)(cid:61)(cid:168)(cid:116)(cid:186)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:32)(cid:181)(cid:72)(cid:105)(cid:165)(cid:159)(cid:194)
(cid:56)(cid:95)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:58)(cid:60)(cid:147)(cid:77)(cid:96)(cid:138)(cid:182)(cid:158)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:60)(cid:167)(cid:194)(cid:35)(cid:60)(cid:125)(cid:72)(cid:77)(cid:130)(cid:194)(cid:59)(cid:61)(cid:148)(cid:72)(cid:158)(cid:194)
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:194)(cid:58)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:165)(cid:194)(cid:35)(cid:60)(cid:125)(cid:72)(cid:77)(cid:130)(cid:194)(cid:54)(cid:165)(cid:148)(cid:78)(cid:77)(cid:165)(cid:5)(cid:194)(cid:54)(cid:180)(cid:101)(cid:167)(cid:78)(cid:194)(cid:26)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:194)
(cid:34)(cid:60)(cid:120)(cid:165)(cid:106)(cid:125)(cid:138)(cid:148)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:194)(cid:46)(cid:36)(cid:194)(cid:23)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:194)
(cid:37)(cid:78)(cid:60)(cid:148)(cid:194)(cid:47)(cid:148)(cid:10)(cid:194)(cid:57)(cid:60)(cid:130)(cid:77)(cid:130)(cid:31)(cid:194)
(cid:39)(cid:131)(cid:68)(cid:121)(cid:139)(cid:160)(cid:77)(cid:73)(cid:194)(cid:61)(cid:150)(cid:79)(cid:194)(cid:167)(cid:97)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:62)(cid:92)(cid:80)(cid:132)(cid:67)(cid:191)(cid:194)(cid:147)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:143)(cid:140)(cid:131)(cid:161)(cid:77)(cid:159)(cid:194)(cid:167)(cid:138)(cid:194)(cid:167)(cid:96)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:73)(cid:151)(cid:60)(cid:89)(cid:170)(cid:194)(cid:122)(cid:77)(cid:92)(cid:102)(cid:159)(cid:122)(cid:61)(cid:169)(cid:107)(cid:187)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:60)(cid:183)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:167)(cid:194)(cid:60)(cid:158)(cid:194)(cid:108)(cid:170)(cid:194)(cid:150)(cid:77)(cid:121)(cid:60)(cid:166)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:194)(cid:165)(cid:138)(cid:194)(cid:171)(cid:98)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:41)(cid:109)(cid:133)(cid:61)(cid:131)(cid:67)(cid:110)(cid:61)(cid:122)(cid:194)
(cid:46)(cid:60)(cid:131)(cid:61)(cid:94)(cid:77)(cid:126)(cid:77)(cid:134)(cid:165)(cid:194)(cid:51)(cid:147)(cid:63)(cid:67)(cid:172)(cid:111)(cid:67)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:194)(cid:138)(cid:86)(cid:194)(cid:54)(cid:138)(cid:125)(cid:78)(cid:152)(cid:158)(cid:77)(cid:173)(cid:194)(cid:35)(cid:138)(cid:183)(cid:132)(cid:174)(cid:191)(cid:194)(cid:51)(cid:183)(cid:65)(cid:123)(cid:104)(cid:69)(cid:194)(cid:54)(cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:138)(cid:140)(cid:121)(cid:159)(cid:194)(cid:1)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:194)(cid:32)(cid:158)(cid:194)(cid:74)(cid:112)(cid:147)(cid:77)(cid:70)(cid:165)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:6)(cid:194)(cid:60)(cid:92)(cid:81)(cid:135)(cid:67)(cid:192)(cid:194)
(cid:151)(cid:77)(cid:162)(cid:143)(cid:138)(cid:136)(cid:158)(cid:77)(cid:162)(cid:194)(cid:97)(cid:63)(cid:186)(cid:78)(cid:194)(cid:64)(cid:82)(cid:77)(cid:137)(cid:194)(cid:143)(cid:138)(cid:144)(cid:181)(cid:121)(cid:60)(cid:175)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:194)(cid:106)(cid:132)(cid:194)(cid:175)(cid:99)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:32)(cid:92)(cid:77)(cid:130)(cid:67)(cid:191)(cid:194)(cid:53)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:143)(cid:138)(cid:131)(cid:158)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:42)(cid:139)(cid:152)(cid:127)(cid:194)(cid:145)(cid:147)(cid:138)(cid:188)(cid:108)(cid:73)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:194)(cid:64)(cid:192)(cid:194)(cid:165)(cid:97)(cid:78)(cid:194)(cid:49)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:108)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:194)(cid:139)(cid:87)(cid:194)
(cid:45)(cid:77)(cid:92)(cid:103)(cid:159)(cid:122)(cid:60)(cid:165)(cid:113)(cid:188)(cid:80)(cid:194)(cid:32)(cid:184)(cid:75)(cid:106)(cid:176)(cid:158)(cid:11)(cid:194)(cid:54)(cid:184)(cid:64)(cid:127)(cid:114)(cid:158)(cid:158)(cid:106)(cid:139)(cid:132)(cid:194)(cid:189)(cid:60)(cid:158)(cid:17)(cid:106)(cid:158)(cid:194)(cid:74)(cid:183)(cid:83)(cid:194)(cid:171)(cid:140)(cid:194)(cid:193)(cid:138)(cid:183)(cid:147)(cid:194)(cid:138)(cid:91)(cid:106)(cid:71)(cid:78)(cid:194)(cid:64)(cid:191)(cid:194)(cid:54)(cid:77)(cid:145)(cid:177)(cid:82)(cid:125)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:150)(cid:194)(cid:23)(cid:30)(cid:7)(cid:194)(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:12)(cid:194)
(cid:52)(cid:121)(cid:77)(cid:60)(cid:158)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:86)(cid:77)(cid:77)(cid:121)(cid:194)(cid:86)(cid:148)(cid:77)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:165)(cid:138)(cid:194)(cid:148)(cid:77)(cid:60)(cid:69)(cid:95)(cid:194)(cid:138)(cid:181)(cid:178)(cid:194)(cid:158)(cid:100)(cid:138)(cid:180)(cid:123)(cid:72)(cid:194)(cid:192)(cid:138)(cid:181)(cid:194)(cid:99)(cid:60)(cid:186)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:146)(cid:181)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:166)(cid:106)(cid:138)(cid:130)(cid:158)(cid:194)(cid:148)(cid:77)(cid:92)(cid:60)(cid:153)(cid:72)(cid:115)(cid:130)(cid:92)(cid:194)(cid:165)(cid:99)(cid:84)(cid:194)(cid:60)(cid:92)(cid:77)(cid:130)(cid:67)(cid:192)(cid:194)(cid:148)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:143)(cid:138)(cid:130)(cid:158)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:194)
(cid:143)(cid:156)(cid:138)(cid:186)(cid:116)(cid:73)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:13)(cid:194)
(cid:48)(cid:131)(cid:194)(cid:64)(cid:77)(cid:96)(cid:60)(cid:124)(cid:87)(cid:194)(cid:138)(cid:88)(cid:194)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:54)(cid:8)(cid:194)(cid:189)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:60)(cid:143)(cid:143)(cid:154)(cid:77)(cid:67)(cid:101)(cid:61)(cid:167)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:169)(cid:95)(cid:77)(cid:194)(cid:77)(cid:132)(cid:92)(cid:60)(cid:92)(cid:78)(cid:125)(cid:77)(cid:132)(cid:166)(cid:9)(cid:194)(cid:67)(cid:138)(cid:123)(cid:121)(cid:60)(cid:64)(cid:138)(cid:155)(cid:60)(cid:166)(cid:101)(cid:141)(cid:130)(cid:5)(cid:194)(cid:60)(cid:130)(cid:72)(cid:194)(cid:167)(cid:95)(cid:138)(cid:156)(cid:138)(cid:183)(cid:92)(cid:99)(cid:132)(cid:77)(cid:158)(cid:158)(cid:194)(cid:138)(cid:88)(cid:194)(cid:166)(cid:95)(cid:77)(cid:194)
(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:5)
(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:7)
(cid:32)(cid:92)(cid:77)(cid:130)(cid:67)(cid:192)(cid:194)(cid:43)(cid:77)(cid:60)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:54)(cid:184)(cid:143)(cid:78)(cid:149)(cid:101)(cid:135)(cid:169)(cid:77)(cid:132)(cid:73)(cid:77)(cid:132)(cid:168)(cid:194) (cid:36)(cid:61)(cid:178)(cid:77)(cid:194)
(cid:18)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:22)(cid:64)(cid:34)(cid:36)(cid:60)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:64)(cid:24)(cid:36)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:58)(cid:56)(cid:64)(cid:25)(cid:53)(cid:43)(cid:59)(cid:40)(cid:64)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:35)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:51)(cid:59)(cid:40)(cid:53)(cid:3)(cid:64)(cid:30)(cid:25)(cid:64)(cid:12)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:20)(cid:8)(cid:19)(cid:64)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:31)(cid:42)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:40)(cid:21)(cid:64)(cid:15)(cid:9)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:17)(cid:9)(cid:17)(cid:64)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:26)(cid:36)(cid:61)(cid:21)(cid:64)(cid:15)(cid:11)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:14)(cid:11)(cid:64)
(cid:190)(cid:14)(cid:163)(cid:142)(cid:128)(cid:85)(cid:157)(cid:164)(cid:85)(cid:179)(cid:14)(cid:117)(cid:22)(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:129)(cid:76)(cid:16)(cid:185)(cid:163)(cid:194)

--- Page 36 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing Policy was not comprehensive.
We recommend that SCPS revise its Bidding and Purchasing Policy to
a. address all categories of purchases and establish formal dollar thresholds
requiring Board approval for all purchases, such as contracts exceeding
$100,000 (repeat); and
b. require written contracts to document agreed upon terms (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2025
Please provide details of SCPS will revise its Bidding and Purchasing Policy to address all
corrective action or categories of purchases and establish formal dollar thresholds
explain disagreement. requiring Board approval for all purchases, such as contracts
exceeding $100,000.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2025
Please provide details of SCPS revise its Bidding and Purchasing Policy to require written
corrective action or contracts to document agreed upon terms
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 37 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into SCPS’ Bidding and Purchasing Policy and were not
consistently used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPAs).
We recommend that SCPS
a. incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirements and other
identified and acknowledged best practices into its Bidding and
Purchasing Policy,
b. ensure that the performance of the requirements and best practices are
documented when evaluating and participating in ICPAs, and
c. maintain a comprehensive list of all contracts awarded under an ICPA.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/2026
Please provide details of SCPS will incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirements
corrective action or and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
explain disagreement. Bidding and Purchasing Policy.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/2026
Please provide details of SCPS will ensure that the performance of the requirements and best
corrective action or practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
explain disagreement. ICPAs.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/2026
Please provide details of SCPS will maintain a comprehensive list of all contracts awarded
corrective action or under an ICPA.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 38 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
SCPS did not execute formal written contracts for certain special education
services.
We recommend that SCPS require formal written contracts for special
education services
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2025
Please provide details of SCPS will require formal written contracts for special education
corrective action or services.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 39 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
SCPS did not always publish contract solicitations or awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) and did not always prepare written
justifications for sole source procurements, certain of which did not appear
justified.
We recommend that SCPS
a. revise and implement its Bidding and Purchasing Policy to require the
publication of contract solicitations and awards on eMMA as required,
including posting the contracts noted above (repeat);
b. ensure that sole source contract justifications are prepared as required;
and
c. obtain goods and services through a documented competitive
procurement process when applicable (such as, when other vendors can
provide the goods and services) to ensure the awarded price is fair and
reasonable (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2025
Please provide details of SCPS will revise and implement its Bidding and Purchasing Policy to
corrective action or require the publication of contract solicitations and awards on
explain disagreement. eMMA as required, including posting the contracts noted above.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2025
Please provide details of SCPS will ensure that sole source contract justifications are
corrective action or prepared as required.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2025
Please provide details of obtain goods and services through a documented competitive
corrective action or procurement process when applicable (such as, when other vendors
explain disagreement. can provide the goods and services) to ensure the awarded price is
fair and reasonable.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 40 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 5 through 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with SCPS’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, SCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 41 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 8
SCPS could not support the maintenance costs paid to the bus contractors,
improperly paid for excise and fuel tax, and did not have provisions to audit
the contractors to verify key contract terms.
We recommend that SCPS
a. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs or otherwise develop supportable cost
estimates as the basis for per mile maintenance costs (repeat),
b. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments (repeat), and
c. include a provision to audit the bus contractors in future contracts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/1/2026
Please provide details of SCPS will use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing
corrective action or contractor rates for per mile maintenance costs or otherwise develop
explain disagreement. supportable cost estimates as the basis for per mile maintenance
costs.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2025
Please provide details of SCPS will exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2025
Please provide details of SCPS will include a provision to audit the bus contractors in future
corrective action or contracts.
explain disagreement.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 42 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
SCPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus safety camera system
instead of conducting a competitive procurement.
We recommend that SCPS adhere to statutory requirements for competitive
bidding for future bus safety camera contract procurements.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2026
Please provide details of SCPS will adhere to statutory requirements for competitive bidding
corrective action or for future bus safety camera contract procurements.
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 43 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
OLA has determined that Finding 10 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available
audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although
the specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s),
along with SCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this report copy, SCPS’
responses indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 44 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 11
SCPS did not obtain and review claims data or verify the eligibility of
enrolled dependents and did not adequately monitor the performance of its
TPA.
We recommend that SCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and any
additional information on the year-end settlement (repeat);
b. obtain documentation to verify the eligibility of dependents claimed by
enrolled health care program participants (repeat); and
c. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2026
Please provide details of SCPS will obtain documentation to support actual claim payments
corrective action or and any additional information on the year-end settlement
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2026
Please provide details of SCPS will obtain documentation to verify the eligibility of
corrective action or dependents claimed by enrolled health care program participants.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 11c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2026
Please provide details of SCPS will establish a process to independently verify, on an annual
corrective action or basis, the TPA’s compliance with required performance measures
explain disagreement. and assess penalties when performance goals are not met
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 45 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Jammie A. Brown
Kareem R. Jackson
Staff Auditors
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditor