Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Information Technology and Communications Division
Date: 2025-10-01
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68e02878b371939c83e827b0
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:13:42.606693
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Information Technology and Communications Division
October 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 1, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) – Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD). The
ITCD operates the DPSCS data center with an associated wide area network and
maintains application systems which provide computing resources for DPSCS
operating agencies. Our audit included an internal control review of the DPSCS
data center and the network administered by the ITCD that supports both ITCD
and DPSCS. Our audit did not include ITCD’s fiscal operations which are
audited separately by us and are reported upon in an audit report under the name
of DPSCS - Central Operations.
Our audit disclosed certain cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.

--- Page 4 ---
DPSCS’ response to this audit, on behalf of ITCD, is included as an appendix to
this report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of DPSCS’
response related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to
our findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
ITCD.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 6
Information Technology
Finding 1 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 6
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 6
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 6
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services’ (DPSCS)
Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD) operates the
DPSCS data center as a computer service provider for DPSCS operating agencies.
ITCD provides data, information, and communications services to DPSCS,
criminal justice entities, and the public. In addition, ITCD maintains numerous
application systems containing sensitive information.
The ITCD also operates a wide area network connected to many statewide sites,
such as local law enforcement agencies, and the DPSCS data center’s local
network providing access to various information technology services including
mainframe computer-based applications (for example, the Criminal Justice
Information System), database management, network services, and the internet.
According to the agency’s records, ITCD’s fiscal year 2025 expenditures totaled
approximately $61.9 million. Expenditures have significantly increased during
the audit period (from $42 million in fiscal year 2020) primarily due to an
increase in employee positions and equipment upgrades.
We conduct separate audits of DPSCS Central Operations (which includes the
Division of Parole and Probation), DPSCS Regional Operations, and Maryland
Correctional Enterprises. This audit focused exclusively on the ITCD computer
and network operations. Certain ITCD fiscal and operational activities are subject
to audit during the DPSCS Central Operations audit.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 2021. See Figure 1 for the results
of our review.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 1 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted1
Finding 2 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted1
1 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
has been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 1
through 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DPSCS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) – Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD).
Fieldwork associated with our audit of ITCD was conducted during the period
from November 2024 to July 2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ITCD’s internal
controls over the DPSCS data center and network and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer systems that
support DPSCS and its user agencies.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. A description of the specific
information systems and related control functions addressed by the audit have
been redacted from this report as required by State Government Article Section 2-
1224(i) described below. We also determined the status of the findings contained
in our preceding audit report on ITCD.
ITCD’s fiscal operations are audited separately as part of our audit of DPSCS –
Central Operations. The most recent report on DPSCS – Central Operations was
issued on September 17, 2024.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and to the extent
practicable, observations of ITCD operations. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk, the
timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance of the transaction to
the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do not normally use
sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical
nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested.
Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a finding, the results from
any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to project those results to
the entire population from which the test items were selected.
7

--- Page 10 ---
We also performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
ITCD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets
(including information systems resources); and compliance with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing
Standards, there are five components of internal control: control environment,
risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and
monitoring. Each of the five components, when significant to the audit
objectives, and as applicable to ITCD, were considered by us during the course of
this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ITCD’s ability to operate information systems resources
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to ITCD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
8

--- Page 11 ---
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that all findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to ITCD and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of ITCD, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX
September 30, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has
reviewed the Office of Legislative Audits Draft Audit Report dated September
2025 for the DPSCS – Information Technology and Communications Division. We
appreciate the constructive findings and recommendations that were made as the
result of this audit.
Please find attached Chief Information Officer Stanley Lofton’s itemized
responses to the findings and recommendations. Corrective action has or will
be taken for the findings noted by the Legislative Auditor, and we will
closely monitor their reported corrective action status in order to prevent any repeat
audit findings in the next audit.
If you have any questions regarding this response, please contact me.
Sincerely,
Carolyn J. Scruggs
Secretary
Attachment
Copy: Adam Flasch, Deputy Chief of Staff for Public Safety and Homeland
Security

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Information Technology and Communications Division
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 1 through 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with DPSCS’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, DPSCS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 14 ---
AUDIT TEAM
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Christopher C. Pitre
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors