Title: Maryland Department of Health - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration - Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services
Date: 2025-10-03
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68e55f898205b6fbf7a88523
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:13:33.777711
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
October 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted a reference to cybersecurity information from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 3, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) and the Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA) Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
for Behavioral Health Services for the period beginning July 1, 2021 and ending
October 31, 2024.
BHA is responsible for operating the Public Behavioral Health System to provide
mental health and substance-related disorder services to the citizens of Maryland.
MCPA is responsible for overseeing the ASO which pays provider claims,
determines behavioral health recipient eligibility, authorizes recipient services,
and performs oversight of providers.
Our audit disclosed that BHA and MCPA did not ensure that claims paid by the
ASO were proper and supported, that overpayments identified were recovered,
and that necessary corrective or disciplinary actions were taken. Similar
conditions have been commented upon in one or more of our three preceding
audit reports dating back to August 2017 but not sufficiently corrected. In
addition, BHA did not conduct required audits to ensure that the ASO properly
authorized behavioral health services, a condition commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports dating back to January 2020 but not corrected.
Our audit further noted that MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve claims
paid by the ASO that were denied for federal reimbursement or approved for an
amount that was different than the amount paid. Our review of MCPA records as
of December 6, 2024 disclosed there were approximately 19,700 unresolved
denied claims totaling $5.8 million, certain of which dated back to October 2017.
This condition was commented on in our prior report but not corrected.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain information
technology consulting services for the ASO system and could not support that
costs were reasonable, a condition commented on in our prior report but not
corrected.
In our preceding audit report, dated October 25, 2022, we reported that MDH’s
accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the
rating system we established in conformity with State law. Based on the results
of our current audit, we have concluded that MDH has made improvements in its
fiscal and compliance operations and, accordingly, MDH’s accountability and
compliance level is no longer unsatisfactory.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of BHA and MCPA, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our
findings and related recommendations and will notify MDH of any needed
clarification to ensure the responses sufficiently address the related findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by BHA
and MCPA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Estimated Payments to Providers Update 6
Loss of Enhanced Federal Funding 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
* Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) did not 9
ensure that claims paid by the ASO were proper and supported, that
overpayments identified were recovered, and that necessary
corrective or disciplinary actions were taken.
* Finding 2 – MDH – Behavioral Health Administration did not conduct 11
required audits to ensure that the ASO properly authorized
behavioral health services.
* Finding 3 – MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration did not 12
timely investigate and resolve claims paid by the ASO that were
denied for federal reimbursement or approved for an amount that
was different than the amount paid.
Contracts
* Finding 4 – MDH circumvented State procurement regulations 13
to obtain information technology consulting services from a vendor
totaling $18 million and could not support that the costs were
reasonable.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 19
Compliance Audits of MDH Units as of September 2025
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) is responsible for operating the Public Behavioral Health System
(PBHS). PBHS provides mental health and substance-related disorder (including
drug, alcohol, and gambling addictions) services to the citizens of Maryland
through private for-profit and non-profit community-based providers, local health
department clinics, and State operated facilities. These services are financed
through a combination of grants and contracts with vendors and direct
reimbursements through a fee-for-service system operated by an Administrative
Service Organization (ASO) under contract with MDH’s Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA).
The ASO pays provider claims through its fee-for-service system, determines
behavioral health recipient eligibility, authorizes recipient services, and performs
oversight of providers to ensure the propriety and accuracy of claims and related
services. The ASO contract in effect during our audit period covered services for
the five-year period from January 2020 through December 2024, for which
payments to the ASO totaled $124.7 million.
The scope of this audit includes BHA’s responsibilities in overseeing the PBHS
and MCPA’s monitoring of the ASO contract deliverables, claims processing
(including denied claims), provider audits, and information systems security.
Separate audits are conducted of MCPA’s primary functions (such as recipient
eligibility, long-term care, and hospital services), MCPA’s monitoring of
Managed Care Organizations, and the MCPA pharmacy programs. In addition,
the administration of the behavioral health facilities was transferred from BHA to
the Office of the Deputy Secretary for Operations effective May 2019 and was
included in our audit of the Maryland Department of Health Office of the
Secretary.
According to the State's records, BHA's expenditures, excluding fee-for-service
payments processed by the ASO, were primarily for mental health and substance-
related disorder programs and services, and totaled approximately $465 million
during fiscal year 2024 (See Figure 1). For the same fiscal year, behavioral health
claims disbursements made by the ASO from two State-funded bank accounts
totaled $2.9 billion. These disbursements have significantly increased during the
audit period (from $1.8 billion in fiscal year 2021) primarily due to higher
enrollment and utilization of services as well as several increases in provider
4

--- Page 7 ---
reimbursement rates. The vast majority of claims were eligible for federal fund
participation (reimbursement), which is normally at least 50 percent of the amount
paid.
During the period of June 30, 2021 through June 30, 2024, BHA had vacancy
rates that ranged from 5.7 percent to 25.5 percent. As of June 30, 2024,
approximately 25.5 percent of the total 165 positions were vacant. These
vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
Although not reflected in Figure 1, MCPA advised there are an additional 7 full-
time positions dedicated to the administration of the ASO vendor, as of June 30,
2024.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
BHA and MCPA ASO
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 123
Vacant1 42
Total 165
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $ 16,836,488
Technical and Special Fees 6,400,236
Operating Expenses 441,878,765
Fee-for-Service Claims2 2,860,690,544
Total $ 3,325,806,033
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 1,357,328,726
Special Fund 44,888,744
Federal Fund 1,917,643,177
Reimbursable Fund 5,945,386
Total $ 3,325,806,033
Source: State financial and personnel records
Estimated Payments to Providers Update
In our preceding audit report we noted that numerous deficiencies with the ASO’s
claim processing ultimately required the issuance of $1.06 billion in estimated
payments to providers, including $223.5 million that had not been supported or
recovered as of December 2021. According to MDH records, $186 million of this
1 In accordance with Chapter 101, Laws of Maryland of 2023, on October 25, 2023 BPW
approved MDH’s request to convert 180 contractual positions to 144 regular positions. The
vacancies include 19 converted positions. BHA also added 13 new administrative positions for
oversight over mental health and substance abuse programs and grants.
2 Fee-for-service expenditures are processed by the ASO for Medicaid eligible consumers and
include $75.2 million in State funded services under BHA. The remaining expenditures are for
services that are at least partially federally funded.
6

--- Page 9 ---
amount had been offset, recovered, or forgiven, as of September 2024. The
remaining $37.5 million was referred to the State’s Central Collection Unit.
Loss of Enhanced Federal Funding
During our preceding audit report, we noted the ASO’s failure to comply with
certain contract requirements prevented MCPA from qualifying for enhanced
federal funding for the operational cost of the ASO. MDH management advised
the ASO was ultimately never able to meet these requirements, resulting in MDH
not obtaining approximately $22.2 million in enhanced federal funding.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 25, 2022. See Figure 2 for the results
of our review.
In our preceding audit report, we reported that MDH’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. Based on the results of our current
audit, we have concluded that MDH has improved its fiscal and compliance
operations to the point that MDH’s accountability and compliance level is no
longer unsatisfactory.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The MCPA evaluation of the ASO technical proposals
Finding 1 Not repeated
was not sufficiently comprehensive or documented.
MCPA did not ensure that the ASO’s claim processing
system was functioning prior to launch, resulting in
numerous system deficiencies that ultimately required the
Finding 2 Not repeated
ASO to make $1.06 billion in estimated payments to
providers, of which approximately $223.5 million has not
been supported or recovered.
MDH did not conduct audits to ensure that the ASO Repeated
Finding 3
properly authorized behavioral health services. (Current Finding 2)
MCPA and BHA did not ensure that the ASO performed
a sufficient number of provider audits, that the audits
Repeated
Finding 4 included financially material and current transactions, and
(Current Finding 1)
that any overpayments and deficiencies identified were
corrected.
Finding 5 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
A lack of ASO vendor compliance with a certain contract
Finding 6 requirement prevented MCPA from obtaining enhanced Not repeated
federal funding.
MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve claims paid
Repeated
Finding 7 by the ASO for which federal reimbursement was denied
(Current Finding 3)
or approved for a different amount than the amount paid.
MDH had not developed a formal policy on the assessing
of liquidated damages and did not assess up to $20.5
million in liquidated damages permitted by the ASO
Finding 8 Not Repeated
contract despite the vendor’s ongoing failure to provide
an operational system or comply with certain
requirements.
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to
Repeated
Finding 9 obtain information technology (IT) consulting services
(Current Finding 4)
totaling approximately $19.8 million from one vendor.
3 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity–related finding
have been redacted from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
According to Maryland Department of Health (MDH) records, the ASO processed
9.1 million claims totaling $2.9 billion during fiscal year 2024. The ASO contract
required the vendor to conduct provider audits to ensure that claims paid were
proper and supported and to report the results to MDH. Based on the number of
issues identified by the audits, the provider is required to prepare a performance
improvement plan (PIP) detailing the corrective actions to be taken. MDH’s
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) is responsible for directing the
ASO to retract payments from providers and the Behavioral Health
Administration (BHA) is responsible for monitoring the implementation of the
PIP.
As noted in our prior audit, there were significant operational deficiencies with
the ASO’s system which resulted in MDH assessing liquidated damages and
penalties totaling $14.6 million between January 2020 and December 2024.
MDH also opted not to exercise the options to extend the contract and initiated a
competitive solicitation for a new ASO in January 2023. In February 2024, MDH
entered into a $339.6 million contract with a new ASO covering the period from
March 1, 2024 to December 31, 2031 (including one two-year option) to design
and develop a new claims processing system and to provide ASO services. The
new ASO system went live on January 1, 2025.
Since these functions were performed by the prior ASO during our audit period,
our audit focused primarily on the activities of the prior ASO. Our audit also
included a review of the procurement of the new ASO system.
Finding 1
MDH did not ensure that claims paid by the ASO were proper and
supported, that overpayments identified were recovered, and that necessary
corrective or disciplinary actions were taken.
Analysis
MDH (including BHA and/or MCPA as applicable) did not ensure that claims
paid by the ASO were proper and supported, that overpayments identified were
recovered, and that necessary corrective or disciplinary actions were taken.
• MDH did not establish a process to ensure that provider claims were proper
and supported. The ASO is contractually required to perform 370 provider
audits annually. MDH historically relied on these audits to ensure the
9

--- Page 12 ---
propriety of the claims. However, the ASO consistently did not perform the
required number of audits over the course of the contract, including 95 of the
134 highest paid providers4 in fiscal year 2024. According to MCPA records,
these 95 providers were paid approximately $452.1 million in fiscal year
2024. Although MDH assessed liquidated damages on the ASO, they did not
take any steps to ensure the provider claims were proper, such as by
independently testing provider claims for propriety.
• MDH did not recover outstanding overpayments identified during provider
audits prior to June 2024. Based on MCPA records, as of November 2024
outstanding overpayments identified during provider audits totaled
approximately $6.7 million, including $4.9 million that had been outstanding
for at least one year. MDH management advised that it was not pursuing any
overpayments until it resolved the outstanding balances for estimated
payments previously described in the background of this report.
• MDH did not ensure that providers submitted the required PIPs and
implemented the related corrective actions to resolve findings noted by the
ASO’s audits. Our test of 27 provider audits5 requiring a PIP disclosed that as
of May 2025, 6 providers had not submitted the required PIP for between 1.6
to 3.2 years after the date of the audit report. For another 6 providers, MDH
could not readily determine whether corrective actions had been implemented
for PIPs received between October 2022 and January 2024.
• MDH did not always take disciplinary action against non-compliant providers.
MDH’s policy provides that disciplinary action may be taken for
noncompliance by providers, such as the failure to submit required PIPs, and
could result in revocation of the provider’s approval to operate. Our review
disclosed that as of May 2025, MDH had not taken disciplinary action against
any of the 6 aforementioned providers that had not submitted a PIP. MDH
management advised disciplinary actions had not been taken due to competing
priorities.
A similar condition regarding MCPA and BHA not ensuring provider claims were
proper was commented upon in our preceding audit report, the failure to ensure
provider overpayments were recovered was commented upon in our two
4 We analyzed the top 200 highest paid providers by licensed location. Of the 200 providers, we
excluded 49 hospitals, laboratories, residential treatment centers, and federally qualified health
centers that are not subject to audit by the ASO. We also excluded 17 providers that were not an
active Medicaid provider prior to January 2021, since these providers may not have been subject
to audit.
5 Test items were selected from audits completed based on the time elapsed. Specifically, we
selected audits that had been completed for at least a year.
10

--- Page 13 ---
preceding reports, and the failure to ensure that corrective actions were taken
were noted in our three preceding reports dating back to August 2017.6 MDH’s
response to our prior report on behalf of BHA and MCPA indicated that it would
take corrective actions for all of these issues by December 2023. However, as
noted above, these deficiencies had not been corrected at the time of our review.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDH
a. in conjunction with the ASO, ensure that provider audit requirements
are completed annually (repeat) or that an alternative plan is
implemented;
b. consider high risk providers and materiality of payments in provider
selection for audit (repeat);
c. timely recover overpayments identified during audits (repeat); and
d. ensure that provider PIPs are received timely, that corrective actions are
implemented (repeat), and that disciplinary action is taken, if necessary.
Finding 2
BHA did not conduct required audits to ensure that the ASO properly
authorized behavioral health services.
Analysis
BHA did not conduct required audits to ensure that the ASO properly authorized
behavioral health services. MDH written procedures provide that BHA personnel
are to conduct annual audits of the ASO to verify the propriety of ASO behavioral
health services authorizations. According to the ASO’s records, it authorized 8.5
million behavioral health services7 in fiscal year 2024, resulting in claim
payments totaling $2 billion.
Our review disclosed that, as of September 2025, BHA had not conducted audits
of calendar year 2023 and 2024 authorizations. BHA management advised that
the calendar year 2023 audit was not conducted due to employee turnover and that
it did not plan to audit calendar year 2024 authorizations because MDH
transitioned to the new ASO in January 2025. The lack of audits is significant
because these audits, when conducted, have historically found instances in which
6 Prior to our Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services audit report dated October
25, 2022, the Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization were audited separately.
7 During this period the ASO also denied approximately 25,000 authorization requests.
11

--- Page 14 ---
the medical necessity of services and the clients’ diagnoses were not documented
which could ultimately result in improper payments to providers.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to January 2020. In its response to the preceding report, MDH on
behalf of BHA and MCPA indicated that annual audits of the prior year’s
authorizations would be performed starting in calendar year 2023. As noted
above, these audits still had not been conducted.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDH ensure that the ASO properly authorized
behavioral health services and that the bases for the authorizations were
adequately documented. Specifically, we recommend that MDH ensure that
BHA personnel conduct audits of the ASO at least annually (repeat).
Finding 3
MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve claims paid by the ASO that
were denied for federal reimbursement or approved for an amount that was
different than the amount paid.
Analysis
MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve all claims paid by the ASO that
were denied or approved for a different amount (discrepant) by the federally
certified Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II).8 The ASO is
responsible for initially receiving and processing provider claims through its
claim processing system. Once a claim has been processed and paid by the ASO,
it is submitted to MMIS II and subject to the claim processing edits that are
intended to ensure only eligible claims are submitted for federal reimbursement.
Our review of MCPA records as of December 6, 2024 disclosed there were still
approximately 19,700 unresolved denied claims totaling $5.8 million, certain of
which dated back to October 2017. These claims consisted of $1.4 million that
had not been investigated by the ASO and $4.4 million that had been investigated
by the ASO but remained unresolved by MCPA. In addition, approximately
33,600 discrepant claims totaling $3.2 million had not been resolved for the same
period, consisting of claims totaling $1.5 million that exceeded the Medicaid rate
and claims totaling $1.7 million where the amount was lower than the Medicaid
rate.
8 MDH uses MMIS II to process paid claims for federal reimbursement. In addition, although
provider payments for behavioral health services are issued by the ASO, MMIS II is used to pay
providers for other Medicaid programs that operate on a fee-for-service basis.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Since federal regulations only provide two years from the calendar quarter a claim
was paid by the State to request reimbursement, the federal portion (generally 50
percent) of certain of these claims may no longer be recoverable. In this regard,
$4 million of the unresolved denied claims and $2.2 million of the discrepant
claims ($1.2 million exceeding the Medicaid rate and $1 million that were below
the Medicaid rate) discussed above related to claims paid by the ASO at least two
years prior to December 6, 2024. MDH management advised us that it had not
determined the appropriate action to take for these claims. MDH advised it
believes federal reimbursement could still be obtained due to the unprecedented
system deficiencies under the prior ASO.
Similar conditions regarding claims that were denied federal reimbursement or
approved for a different amount were commented upon in our preceding audit
report. In response to our prior report, MDH on behalf of BHA and MCPA
agreed to timely investigate and recover federal reimbursement for these claims,
with the goal of having a fully reconciled system by December 2024. Although
MCPA implemented a process in July 2023 to investigate denied claims which
resulted in a substantial reduction9 in the number of unresolved denied claims
compared to the prior audit, as noted above, a significant number of claims were
still unresolved at the time of our review.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDH continue to ensure denied and discrepant claims
are timely investigated, resolved, and federal reimbursement recovered
(repeat).
Contracts
Finding 4
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain information
technology (IT) consulting services from a vendor totaling $18 million and
could not support that the costs were reasonable.
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain IT consulting
services for the ASO system and could not support that the costs were reasonable.
Specifically, during the period from August 2021 through January 2025, MDH
directed a vendor under a statewide contract to pay a subcontractor for work
9 Specifically, our preceding audit report noted that, as of September 2021, there were
approximately 292,000 unresolved denied claims requiring investigation totaling approximately
$106.7 million. In addition, there were 388,000 discrepant claims, including claims totaling
$13.8 million that exceeded the Medicaid rate.
13

--- Page 16 ---
performed for MCPA related to the ASO. MDH controlled the selection, work
duties, and oversight of the vendor which raises questions as to the propriety of its
use of the statewide contract rather than competitively procuring the services as
required by State procurement regulations.
Furthermore, MDH could not support that the $18 million paid to the vendor as of
July 2025 was reasonable. The contract provided that the statewide contractor
would be paid a fixed fee for these services but MDH could not document how
the fee was determined to support that it was reasonable for the services being
provided. For example, we noted that the fixed fee included up to 18 percent in
administrative fees, for which actual payments as of July 2025 totaled $3.2
million. MDH could not document any specific work performed by the statewide
contractor to support the administrative fee, other than to pay the vendor and bill
MCPA.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report in which
we noted that MDH used a combination of procurement methods to obtain
services from this vendor dating back to July 2017 including directing the
aforementioned statewide contract vendor to pay the aforementioned vendor. In
response to our prior report, MDH on behalf of BHA and MCPA indicated it
would reassess its procurement practices. However, as noted above MDH
continues to use the same vendor without a competitive procurement process.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDH
a. comply with State procurement regulations and competitively procure
services or, if the services of a particular vendor are required, adequately
document the justification for the sole source procurement (repeat); and
b. ensure amounts paid for services, including any administrative fees, are
supported and reasonable.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the periods beginning July 1, 2021
and ending October 31, 2024.
• Behavioral Health Administration (BHA)
• Medical Care Program Administration (MCPA) Administrative Service
Organization (ASO) for Behavioral Health Services
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the respective
MDH units’ financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate
its compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurement, the monitoring of ASO contract
deliverables, claims processing (including denied claims), provider audits, and
monitoring of grant and contract provisions. We also determined the status of the
nine findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by MDH’s Office of
the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance
of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope
of our audit of the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, a
separate audit of the State’s behavioral health hospital centers is performed by our
office. Therefore, the activities of these hospitals were not included in the scope
of our audit.
Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance
with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of compliance with those laws and regulations by MDH and its units
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including MDH.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2021 to October 31, 2024, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel (including certain ASO employees, inspection of
documents and records, tests of transactions, and to the extent practicable,
observations of BHA and MCPA operations. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk, the
timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance of the transaction to
the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do not normally use
sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical
nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested.
Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a finding, the results from
any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to project those results to
the entire population from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
We also extracted data from MDH’s ASO system for the purpose of testing
compliance with the ASO contract provisions. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
MDH’s management at the respective units is responsible for establishing and
maintaining effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of
financial records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including
safeguarding of assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there
are five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment,
control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the
16

--- Page 19 ---
five components, when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the
respective MDH units, were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the respective MDH unit’s ability to maintain reliable financial
records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to the respective MDH units that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity information before a
report is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity information – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain information in this report
falls under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report
all specifics as to the nature of this cybersecurity information has been redacted.
We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and government auditing
standards, support the redaction of this information from the public audit report.
The specifics of the cybersecurity information has been communicated to MDH
and those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations in an unredacted
audit report.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The response from MDH, on behalf of BHA and MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of September 2025 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
• John L. Gildner Regional Institute
Regional Institute for Children and for Children and Adolescents
1 08/25/25
Adolescents • Regional Institute for Children
and Adolescents – Baltimore
Developmental Disabilities Developmental Disabilities
2 06/18/25
Administration Administration
• 22 Health Professional Boards and
3 Regulatory Services Commissions 04/09/25
• The Office of Health Care Quality
4 Vital Statistics Administration • Vital Statistics Administration 03/19/25
• Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
• Office of Population Health
Improvement
Prevention and Health Promotion
• Office of Preparedness and
Administration - Office of
Response
Population Health Improvement -
5 • Office of Provider Engagement 08/09/24
Office of Preparedness and
and Regulation – Office of
Response - Office of Provider
Controlled Substances
Engagement and Regulation
Administration
• Office of Provider Engagement
and Regulation – Prescription
Drug Monitoring Program
6 Pharmacy Services Pharmacy Services 08/09/24
7 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
• Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
• Eastern Shore Hospital Center
8 State Psychiatric Hospital Centers • Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
• Springfield Hospital Center
• Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
19

--- Page 22 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of September 2025 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
• Maryland Health Care Commission
• Health Services Cost Review
9 Health Regulatory Commission Commission 01/25/24
• Maryland Community Health
Resources Commission
Medical Care Programs Managed Care Program, known as
10 Administration – Managed Care HealthChoice including oversight of the 12/14/23
Program nine private Managed Care Organizations
Medical Care Programs
11 Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/23
Administration
• Office of the Secretary
• Deputy Secretary and Executive
Director for Behavioral Health
• Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and Other Disabilities
12 10/19/23
Units • Deputy Secretary for Public Health
• Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating
Officer
• Deputy Secretary for Operations
• Deer’s Head Center
13 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
• Western Maryland Hospital Center
• Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential • Potomac Center
14 10/24/22
Centers • Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
Office of the Chief Medical
15 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
Examiner
20

--- Page 23 ---
APPENDIX
October 3, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of Health –
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration – Administrative
Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services for the period beginning July 1, 2021 and ending
October 31, 2024.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Meena Seshamani, M.D., Ph.D.
Secretary
Enclosures
cc: Kate Wolff, MPA, Chief of Staff, MDH
Emily Berg, Deputy Chief of Staff, MDH
Alyssa S. Lord, Deputy Secretary, BHA-MDH
Alexandra Baldi, Chief of Staff, BHA-MDH
Perrie T. Briskin, Deputy Secretary, Health Care Financing and Medicaid, MDH
Liz Schuelke, Chief of Staff, MDH
Clint Hackett, Deputy Secretary for Operations, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
Finding 1
MDH did not ensure that claims paid by the ASO were proper and
supported, that overpayments identified were recovered, and that necessary
corrective or disciplinary actions were taken.
We recommend that MDH
a. in conjunction with the ASO, ensure that provider audit requirements
are completed annually (repeat) or that an alternative plan is
implemented;
b. consider high risk providers and materiality of payments in provider
selection for audit (repeat);
c. timely recover overpayments identified during audits (repeat); and
d. ensure that provider PIPs are received timely, that corrective actions are
implemented (repeat), and that disciplinary action is taken, if necessary.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2026
Please provide details of Due to the unsuccessful launch of the ASO in 2020, there was a delay in
corrective action or implementing provider audits. Additionally, the vendor and the
explain disagreement. Department were focused on operational concerns which meant that there
was an inability to rely on data and reporting coming from the ASO.
While efforts were made to catch up on the required number of audits, the
vendor was unsuccessful in completing the required targets.
With the launch of the current ASO on January 1, 2025, BHA and MCPA
are requiring the new ASO to conduct 212 audits for both the first and
final years of the contract and 425 annually for Years 2-4. In addition,
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
BHA/MCPA are establishing milestones for the following:
1. ASO to develop data mining criteria.
2. BHA/MCPA to review and approve audit tools and associated
provider training.
3. BHA/MCPA to review the number and quality of audits
completed annually.
4. BHA/MCPA to require updated audit plans for any lapses
including a corrective action plan to complete the full number of
required audits by the conclusion of the current BHASO vendor’s
contract period.
Once these milestones are established, the MDH Office of Internal
Controls, Audit Compliance and Information Security (IAC/S) will
periodically review and report on BHA/MCPA progress against the
milestones. MDH expects the first round of milestone reviews to be
completed by 10/31/2026.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2026
Please provide details of BHA has directed the new ASO to prioritize auditing the following
corrective action or provider types: Outpatient Mental Health Center (OMHC); Psychiatric
explain disagreement. Rehabilitation Program- Adults (PRP-A)- including associated Health
Home when applicable; Psychiatric Rehabilitation Program- Minors
(PRP-M); Level 1 Outpatient Program (OP); Level 2.1 Intensive
Outpatient Program (IOP); Level 2.5 Partial Hospitalization Program
(PHP); and Opioid Treatment Program (OTP). Please note that the
prioritization of these provider types does not limit the ASO from auditing
all other provider types. The prioritization of these providers was based
on an analysis of claims which found that out of $1.1M in claims, more
than $600K in claims was retractable. Based upon prior audits, we have
found these three provider types have yielded higher rates of Fraud Waste
and Abuse (FWA). This has led the Department to request to CMS (with
subsequent approval) a pause on new provider enrollment into Medicaid
for PRP, PHP and IOP.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Providers may be audited both at random in addition to identified outlier
billing practices, upon selection by the Department, and through reports
from participants, providers, or stakeholders.
On or about 1/1/2026, IAC/S will begin a review of the ASO’s first-year
audits to determine whether the BHA priorities were followed. IAC/S will
report on the status of its review by 3/31/2026.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/28/2026
Please provide details of BHA and MCPA, through the efforts of the current ASO, will be
corrective action or promptly recouping overpayments. This activity has already been initiated
explain disagreement. with the current ASO currently collecting overpayment from prior audit
findings that were not previously recovered.
On or about 1/1/2026, IAC/S will begin a review of the ASO’s first-year
audits to determine whether MDH is promptly recovering overpayments
identified during the audits. IAC/S will report on the status of its review
by 3/31/2026.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2026
Please provide details of BHA and MCPA agree that PIPs must be received in accordance with the
corrective action or required timeframes and will take corrective action for providers who do
explain disagreement. not submit a PIP as required, which may include more frequent audits and
retractions for undocumented services.
On or about 1/1/2026, IAC/S will begin a review of the ASO’s first-year
audits to determine whether provider PIPs, if any, have been timely
provided to BHA; that BHA has documented the implementation of any
required corrective actions; and that BHA has identified and documented
any associated disciplinary actions. IAC/S will report on the status of its
review by 3/31/2026.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
BHA did not conduct required audits to ensure that the ASO properly
authorized behavioral health services.
We recommend that MDH ensure that the ASO properly authorized
behavioral health services and that the bases for the authorizations were
adequately documented. Specifically, we recommend that MDH ensure that
BHA personnel conduct audits of the ASO at least annually (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2026
Please provide details of MDH is committed to resuming timely completion of annual Medical
corrective action or Necessity Criteria (MNC) audits to ensure that the ASO properly
explain disagreement authorizes behavioral health services and that the basis of authorizations
is adequately documented. MDH has initiated planning for the annual
MNC audit of calendar year 2025 authorizations to begin in early 2026.
On or about 4/1/2026, IAC/S will begin a review to determine whether
BHA conducted the annual MNC audit as planned. IAC/S will report on
the status of its review by 6/30/2026.
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve claims paid by the ASO that
were denied for federal reimbursement or approved for an amount that was
different than the amount paid.
We recommend that MDH continue to ensure denied and discrepant claims
are timely investigated, resolved, and federal reimbursement recovered
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2026
Please provide details of Recoverable outstanding Federal Financial Participation (FFP) were
corrective action or transferred to the current ASO and are undergoing rigorous review to
explain disagreement. capture any past and present outstanding FFP. Certain services that have
a dependency on eligibility spans which are no longer available are not
included in this review but may be included under other contractual
considerations MDH may pursue. All claims paid by the current ASO
are now and will continue to be continuously monitored for all available
federal participation matches. MCPA has resumed productive “FFP”
management meetings to monitor the current ASO’s and Medicaid
system alignments progress.
On or about 1/1/2026, IAC/S will begin a review of BHA documentation
regarding the investigation, resolution, and recovery of federal
reimbursement associated with denied and discrepant claims. IAC/S will
report on the status of its review by 3/31/2026.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Contracts
Finding 4
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain information
technology (IT) consulting services from a vendor totaling $18 million and
could not support that the costs were reasonable.
We recommend that MDH
a. comply with State procurement regulations and competitively procure
services or, if the services of a particular vendor are required, adequately
document the justification for the sole source procurement (repeat); and
b. ensure amounts paid for services, including any administrative fees, are
supported and reasonable.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/1/2027
Please provide details of The RFP for a competitive bid process has been completed and
corrective action or submitted for review under the Office of Contracts Management and
explain disagreement. Procurement (OCMP) as of August 2025. This could not be completed
sooner due to the complexities of the phasing out of the prior vendor and
the transition of the new vendor with all the associated operational and
configuration efforts that needed to be completed. MDH estimates that
the solicitation should be made in CY 2026 with a selection by
3/1/2027.
**The State is exploring all available procurement options in order to
not have a gap for this critical resource.
We appreciate OLA’s consideration as the timing of the competitive bid
did not align with the unexpected discontinuation of the current contract
vehicle.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/1/2027
Please provide details of BHA and MCPA have experienced the value of this resource with a high
corrective action or performing ASO and a poor performing ASO. Throughout this process,
explain disagreement. extensive documentation of deliverables and setting expectations has
been continuously adopted into the pending competitive solicitation.
MDH will ensure that the final contract will be supported by deliverables
and are reasonable based on the needs for overseeing a (approx.) $45
million a year, highly complex, ASO contract.
On or about 3/1/2027, IAC/S will review MDH documentation that it
has competitively bid the scope of work associated with this contract.
IAC/S will also review MDH documentation to determine whether BHA
evaluated amounts paid to the incumbent for support and reasonableness.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 31 ---
AUDIT TEAM
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
Johanna K. Bachman
Charlotte M.S. Chamberlin
Ali A. Dayya
Timothy Moon
Zoe D. Smith
Staff Auditors