Title: State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and Policies Involving a DAT Employee
Date: 2025-10-06
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68e7beb80678f605f4dd7048
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:13:24.106565
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving a DAT Employee
October 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 6, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review of a referral received through our fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline regarding the State Department of Assessments and Taxation
(DAT). The allegation related to possible violations of State laws, regulations,
and policies including questionable corporate purchasing card (CPC) purchases
involving a DAT employee. Our review disclosed certain matters that we referred
to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. Our review also
identified CPC procedural deficiencies that require corrective action by DAT.
Specifically, our review disclosed that DAT could not document that it
investigated questionable CPC charges processed by one DAT cardholder and did
not identify certain questionable transactions. Our review of the cardholder’s
CPC activity identified questionable and unsupported payments, including
payments for vacation rental properties processed on behalf of two DAT
management employees. For example, the cardholder processed at least 230
payments totaling $41,400 for which DAT was unable to provide documentation.
DAT also did not take appropriate follow-up action after it identified the
questionable activity. For example, DAT did not refer the matter to the Office of
the Attorney General – Criminal Division, as required.
Our review also disclosed that DAT did not establish comprehensive procedures
and controls over CPC activity, which may have contributed to the
aforementioned questionable activity going undetected. For example, DAT
supervisors approved 23 months of the cardholder’s logs despite missing and
illegible documentation, including one month where 16 of the 33 transactions
were not properly supported.

--- Page 4 ---
DAT’s response to this review is included as an appendix to this report. We have
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review by the
DAT.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of a referral received through our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline regarding the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT). The
purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegations were valid and
the extent to which the related activities violated State laws, regulations, and
policies. This review was performed in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Our review did not
constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards.
The allegations related to questionable corporate purchasing card (CPC)
purchases involving an individual employed at DAT’s headquarters during the
period from May 2019 through August 2024. Accordingly, the scope of our
review included CPC purchases made by this employee during the period from
May 8, 2019 through August 17, 2024. We also reviewed CPC purchases made
by other DAT employees during the period from September 1, 2022 through
January 31, 2025. Finally, we reviewed certain personnel records related to the
employee referenced in the allegation.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, inspections of documents
and records, and discussions with DAT personnel and others, as we deemed
necessary, to achieve our objectives. Our review was conducted during the period
from March 2025 through June 2025.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division (GAD) provides
administration for the State Corporate Purchasing Card Program and manages the
related contract. According to the Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program Policies and Procedures Manual, each agency is
responsible for establishing its own internal policies, managing cardholders,
assigning authorized reviewers to every cardholder, maintaining required
supporting documentation, and determining if purchases under this program
complies with state law and regulations. This review did not include GAD
administrative services provided to DAT as part of the Corporate Purchasing Card
Program.
DAT’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DAT regarding the results of our
review of its response.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) is responsible for
administering the State’s real and personal property tax laws and various
functions applicable to corporations (for example, issuing corporate charters and
collecting certain taxes, such as gross receipts tax). DAT also administers
programs that provide property tax credits primarily to homeowners and renters
who meet the related eligibility requirements (such as gross income limitations).
According to State records, during fiscal year 2024, DAT’s expenditures totaled
approximately $166.9 million.
Overview
Our Special Investigation Unit reviewed an allegation received by our fraud,
waste, and abuse hotline relating to questionable corporate purchasing card (CPC)
purchases (such as purchases made for personal use) by an individual employed at
DAT’s headquarters during the period from May 2019 through August 2024. Our
review substantiated the allegation that the employee had made questionable CPC
purchases, including questionable CPC payments made on behalf of two senior
management employees. Our review also identified deficiencies with DAT’s
procedures and controls over CPC activity that enabled questionable activity to go
undetected.
Based on our review, certain of these matters were referred to the Office of the
Attorney General’s Criminal Division. A referral to the Criminal Division does
not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be
filed.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Questionable Corporate Purchasing Card (CPC) Activity
Background
According to the State Department of Assessments and Taxation’s (DAT’s)
records, during the period from July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2025, DAT
processed approximately 7,650 CPC transactions totaling $2.3 million (Figure 1).
As of January 2025, there were 37 CPC cardholders.
According to DAT records, the Figure 1
employee referenced in the allegation DAT CPC Activity
made approximately 530 CPC July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2025
payments totaling $118,000 during the Fiscal
Transactions Charges
period from May 2019 through August Year
2024. We reviewed all payments 2022 2,128 $ 597,000
during this period to determine the 2023 1,955 593,000
extent of payments that had been made 2024 2,101 593,000
by the DAT employee that were not 2025 1,465 519,000
properly supported with Total 7,649 $2,302,000
documentation, were approved by a Source: DAT records
supervisor, and/or appeared
questionable. We also tested five1 CPC logs and the related supp orting
documentation for five other cardholders to determine if the logs and payments
were properly supported and approved by a supervisor.
Finding 1
DAT could not document that it investigated questionable CPC charges
processed by one DAT cardholder, did not identify certain questionable
transactions, and did not take appropriate follow-up action.
Analysis
DAT could not document that it investigated questionable CPC charges processed
by one DAT cardholder, did not identify certain questionable transactions, and did
not take appropriate follow-up action. In August 2024, while preparing for an
audit by the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD),
DAT identified questionable purchases made by one DAT cardholder. DAT
management advised us that they investigated the cardholder’s CPC activity
during the period from July 1, 2023 to July 25, 2024 and identified at least $300
1 We selected these logs for testing because the cardholders worked at DAT’s headquarters, which
is where the individual referenced in the allegation was employed.
5

--- Page 8 ---
in questionable payments for personal utilities, gas, and phone bills. Based on the
investigation DAT terminated the cardholder in August 2024.
DAT Could Not Document Its Investigation
Our review disclosed that DAT could not document its investigation.
Specifically, DAT could not document the methodology for its investigation, the
specific transactions tested, or the results of its review of those transactions.
Furthermore, there was no evidence that DAT attempted to contact vendors to
obtain missing receipts and determine the nature of the purchases. Rather, the
documentation provided to us by DAT generally included a list of the
cardholder’s CPC payments with limited transaction information, five of the
cardholder’s CPC logs with examples of illegible receipts, and the cardholder’s
termination letter.
DAT management advised us that it stopped investigating the cardholder’s CPC
activity and terminated the cardholder after it identified $300 in questionable
transactions, the threshold requiring automatic termination of employment.2 DAT
management further advised us that it did not expand the investigation following
the cardholder’s termination because the cardholder and the cardholder’s prior
supervisors were no longer employed at DAT and unable to provide context for
the transactions. The lack of documentation from DAT’s investigation is
significant because of the numerous other questionable and unsupported
transactions we identified.
DAT Did Not Identify Questionable and Unsupported Payments
Our review identified questionable and unsupported payments (such as payments
for vacation rental properties processed on behalf of two DAT management
employees) that were not identified by DAT due to the control deficiencies noted
in Finding 2.
• The cardholder processed at least 230 payments (43 percent) totaling
approximately $41,400 for which DAT was unable to provide documentation,
such as itemized receipts, to support the payments and 16 payments totaling
$1,400 that had illegible documentation. Based on our review of available
Level-3 data and other information, certain of the transactions appeared
questionable. For example, we identified a purchase from one vendor totaling
$376 that included items DAT management advised were questionable, such
as dog food and steaks.
2 According to Section 11-105 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, Annotated Code of
Maryland, theft of State property of a value greater than $300 is a cause for automatic
termination of State employment.
6

--- Page 9 ---
• The cardholder processed at least six transactions totaling $190 that were
questionable based on the supporting documentation provided by the
cardholder. For example, a purchase totaling $23 included tumblers, nail
polish, and other personal items. The supervisors approved the logs for these
transactions despite the questionable nature of the items that were listed in the
supporting documentation.
• The cardholder paid for two vacation rental properties in Ocean City,
Maryland with related costs totaling approximately $6,800 that was
questionable. Our review of available documentation disclosed that two
management employees directed the cardholder to pay for the rentals where
they attended a conference, and one of the management employees approved
the transaction log related to these purchases. However, the conference ran
from August 17, 2022 to August 20, 2022, while the vacation properties were
rented from August 13, 2022 to August 20, 2022 (an additional 4 nights). In
addition, each vacation rental property was reserved for two adults and two
children. DAT could not provide justification for the nights rented prior to the
conference and/or whether the cost of the vacation rental property with the
additional guests was consistent with the cost of a standard hotel room.
DAT Did Not Take Sufficient Action
DAT did not take sufficient corrective action to address the questionable activity.
Although DAT terminated the cardholder, it did not process the termination as a
“termination with prejudice” as indicated in its termination letter. As a result, the
cardholder was eligible to be rehired by another State agency. Based on our
review of available State records, this cardholder had not been rehired as a regular
employee by the State as of March 2025. In addition, DAT did not refer the
matter to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division and the
Governor’s Chief Counsel, as required. Finally, DAT could not document that it
attempted to recover the improper payments identified.
The Governor’s Executive Order, Standards of Conduct for Executive Branch
Employees, requires that all departments and agencies of the State immediately
refer any instances of possible criminal or unethical conduct by an employee to
the Office of the Attorney General and Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel. In
addition, the Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
Policies and Procedures Manual (Manual) requires state agencies to contact the
Attorney General’s Office to investigate card misuse.
Based on our review and the conditions noted above, we referred certain of these
matters to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. A referral to
7

--- Page 10 ---
the Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or
that criminal charges will be filed.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DAT
a. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
before taking any action related to the questionable activity identified
above;
b. ensure all terminations are accurately processed in the State’s records,
including for the employee identified above; and
c. ensure any future instances of possible criminal or unethical conduct are
subject to documented investigation and referred to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal
Counsel, as required.
Finding 2
DAT did not establish comprehensive procedures and controls over CPC
activity as required by the Manual, which may have contributed to the
aforementioned questionable activity going undetected.
Analysis
DAT did not establish comprehensive procedures and controls over CPC activity,
which may have contributed to the aforementioned questionable activity going
undetected. As previously noted, agencies are required to establish their own
procedures to supplement the aforementioned Manual. Our review of DAT’s
CPC procedures disclosed the following:
• DAT did not ensure that the aforementioned cardholder prepared the required
monthly CPC logs. The logs list the transactions processed and the nature of
each purchase and are to be signed by the cardholder and a supervisor. Our
review disclosed that DAT could not provide logs for 27 of the 68 months we
reviewed for the cardholder, which accounted for most of the unsupported
transactions noted in Finding 1. Our review of other cardholders’ activity on
5 monthly logs disclosed that the logs were prepared as required.
• DAT supervisors routinely approved the aforementioned cardholder’s CPC
logs despite the lack of adequate supporting documentation, raising questions
about the legitimacy of the supervisory reviews and approvals. Specifically,
our review disclosed that supervisors approved the cardholder’s logs for 23
months despite missing and illegible documentation. For example, a
supervisor approved the cardholder’s May 2024 log even though 16 of the 33
8

--- Page 11 ---
transactions had illegible or no supporting documentation. Our review of
other cardholders’ activity disclosed that the transactions tested were properly
supported.
• There was no documentation that DAT used available Level-3 data to help
ensure the propriety of CPC purchases. This data, when reported by
merchants, provides detailed purchasing information, including invoice-level
line-item details (such as item descriptions and item quantities).
The Manual requires that cardholders complete a log of all CPC purchases and
provide itemized receipts for all transactions. The Manual also requires
authorized reviewers to ensure that purchases were proper and not for personal
use, to document supervisory reviews of the logs, and to ensure documentation is
maintained supporting that the CPC requirements have been followed. Finally,
the Manual requires State agencies to verify Level-3 data to CPC logs and
document monthly reviews of Level-3 data as part of transaction monitoring.
Failure to comply with the Manual may result in the suspension and/or
termination of either individual purchasing cards or program benefits for an entire
State agency. In addition, according to the agreement signed by all authorized
reviewers, failure to follow established procedures may result in disciplinary
action, reimbursement of unauthorized purchases, loss of leave time, suspension
and/or termination of employment, fines, and/or criminal prosecution.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DAT comply with the Manual. Specifically, DAT
should establish and follow comprehensive procedures to
a. ensure CPC cardholders prepare and complete accurate CPC logs and
include documentation to support the related transactions;
b. perform documented independent supervisory reviews of all CPC logs
and transactions, including reviews of supporting documentation;
c. use available Level-3 data as part of the monthly supervisory review to
aid in the assessment of the propriety of CPC transactions; and
d. take appropriate action when supervisors approve CPC logs that lack
required support or contain questionable purchases.
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX
WES MOORE BOB YEAGER
Governor Director
ARUNA MILLER MARIA MATHIAS
Lt. Governor Associate Director
October 03, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21291
Re: Special Review of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation – Allegations
Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and Policies Involving a DAT
Employee
Dear Mr. Tanen:
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) has received the special review
audit report submitted by the Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative
Audits, for the period from May 2019 through August 2024.
SDAT would like to extend sincere appreciation for the thorough and professional work
carried out during this recent audit. I am attaching our formal response, which addresses
the observations and recommendations outlined in the audit report.
Sincerely,
Bob Yeager
Director, State Department of Assessments and Taxation
cc: Aubrey Bascombe, Chief Financial Officer
Kanchana Wijeratne, Compliance Director
Department of Assessments & Taxation – Headquarters
700 E. Pratt St., Suite 2700 | Baltimore, Maryland 21202 | 410-767-1184 | sdat.411@maryland.gov
dat.maryland.gov

--- Page 13 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving a DAT Employee
Agency Response Form
Questionable Corporate Purchasing Card (CPC) Activity
Finding 1
DAT could not document that it investigated questionable CPC charges
processed by one DAT cardholder, did not identify certain questionable
transactions, and did not take appropriate follow-up action.
We recommend that DAT
a. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
before taking any action related to the questionable activity identified
above;
b. ensure all terminations are accurately processed in the State’s records,
including for the employee identified above; and
c. ensure any future instances of possible criminal or unethical conduct are
subject to documented investigation and referred to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal
Counsel, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The department has referred this matter to the Attorney General's
corrective action or Criminal Division. The department will consult with the Office of the
explain disagreement. Attorney General's Criminal Division before taking any action related to
the questionable activity identified above.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/30/2025
Please provide details of The department updated the State’s records to ensure that the
corrective action or termination for the identified employee is accurately reflected and is
explain disagreement. consistent with the employee’s termination letter. Additionally, the
agency is reviewing all terminations to confirm they were processed
correctly in the State’s records.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 14 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving a DAT Employee
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The department has referred this matter to the Attorney General's
corrective action or Criminal Division. Additionally, the department will follow the
explain disagreement. Governor’s Executive Order, Standards of Conduct for Executive
Branch Employees, and the Comptroller of Maryland Corporate
Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual by ensuring
that any future incidents involving potential criminal or unethical
conduct are documented, investigated, and referred to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal
Counsel, as required.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 15 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving a DAT Employee
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DAT did not establish comprehensive procedures and controls over CPC
activity as required by the Manual, which may have contributed to the
aforementioned questionable activity going undetected.
We recommend that DAT comply with the Manual. Specifically, DAT
should establish and follow comprehensive procedures to
a. ensure CPC cardholders prepare and complete accurate CPC logs and
include documentation to support the related transactions;
b. perform documented independent supervisory reviews of all CPC logs
and transactions, including reviews of supporting documentation;
c. use available Level-3 data as part of the monthly supervisory review to
aid in the assessment of the propriety of CPC transactions; and
d. take appropriate action when supervisors approve CPC logs that lack
required support or contain questionable purchases.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of In August 2024, the department created a corporate purchasing card
corrective action or (CPC) training presentation that aligns with the Comptroller of
explain disagreement. Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policies and Procedures
Manual. The department provided refresher training for cardholders and
reviewers to reinforce proper submission procedures for the CPC log, as
outlined in the Manual. CPC cardholders prepare and complete CPC
logs, and the agency reviews CPC log submissions to ensure they are
accurate and include supporting documentation transactions.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of Documented independent supervisory reviews are performed of CPC
corrective action or logs and transactions, including reviews of supporting documentation.
explain disagreement. Additionally, the agency’s Fiscal Officer or Designee conducts an
independent review of CPC logs to ensure that transactions are
supported by documentation.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 16 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving a DAT Employee
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/30/2025
Please provide details of The department will establish procedures to use available Level-3 data
corrective action or as part of the current monthly supervisory review process, helping assess
explain disagreement. the appropriateness of CPC transactions.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The Department has implemented processes to mitigate the risk of
corrective action or questionable purchases and to ensure appropriate action is taken when
explain disagreement. supervisors approve CPC logs that lack required support or contain
questionable purchases. These include, but are not limited to, the
following:
• Training provided to authorized reviewers to ensure CPC logs are
reviewed and certified in accordance with the Comptroller's CPC
Program Policy and Procedures Manual.
• The agency’s Fiscal Officer or Designee independently reviews
CPC logs to verify that transactions are supported by
documentation and flags questionable purchases (if any) for
further review and appropriate action in accordance with the
Comptroller's CPC Program Policy and Procedures Manual.
• Established a requisition process to ensure cardholders seek prior
fiscal approval before making purchases.
Page 4 of 4