Title: Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority


NOTE: Chapter 111, Laws of Maryland 2023, established the Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority (MTROA) as a public instrumentality of the State to maintain Maryland as a best-in-class thoroughbred horse racing venue. We conducted a fiscal compliance audit of MTROA for the period beginning June 1, 2023 and ending June 30, 2025, the effective date of the law that terminated MTROA. The 2025 Maryland Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act dissolved MTROA effective June 30, 2025 and designated the Maryland Economic Development Corporation and the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) as MTROA’s successors.
Date: 2025-10-10
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68efdf553a73d6d1310f496a
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:12:55.768483
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority
October 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 10, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Thoroughbred
Racetrack Operating Authority (MTROA) for the period beginning June 1, 2023
and ending June 30, 2025, the effective date of the law that terminated MTROA.
Chapter 111, Laws of Maryland 2023, established MTROA as a public
instrumentality of the State to maintain Maryland as a best-in-class thoroughbred
horse racing venue. The 2025 Maryland Budget Reconciliation and Financing
Act dissolved MTROA effective June 30, 2025 and designated the Maryland
Economic Development Corporation and the Maryland Stadium Authority as
MTROA’s successors.
During its existence MTROA was responsible for studying and making
recommendations for thoroughbred racing in the State, including the development
of new and existing horse racing and training facilities, entering into purchasing
and operating agreements with the prior racetrack owner, managing and
overseeing day-to-day thoroughbred horse racing operations, live racing days, and
related assets.
Our audit disclosed that MTROA did not establish written agreements with the
Maryland Jockey Club (TMJC) which was responsible for thoroughbred racing in
the State effective January 1, 2025. Specifically, MTROA did not establish
written agreements with TMJC governing the terms of a $10 million working
capital advance to TMJC and detailing each entities’ roles and responsibilities for
the management and operations of the Pimlico Race Course (Pimlico) and the
training facilities. Such agreements are critical for establishing oversight over the
$527 million that the General Assembly has committed to the redevelopment of
Pimlico and training facilities.

--- Page 4 ---
Additionally, our audit disclosed that MTROA did not ensure that consulting
contracts were in the State’s best interest and that the related services were
appropriate to pay. For example, our review of five consulting contracts with
expenditures totaling $1.9 million disclosed MTROA procured all five contracts
without seeking competition and without ensuring the reasonableness of the
pricing. Furthermore, for four of the contracts with expenditures totaling $1.3
million, MTROA did not ensure the contracts included clearly defined
deliverables and deadlines and that the related invoices were detailed. Therefore,
there was a lack of assurance that invoices were appropriate to pay and that the
services were provided timely.
Since MTROA has been dissolved, the Office of the Governor provided a
response to this audit which is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while the Office
of the Governor generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we
identified certain instances in which statements in the response disagree or appear
to be inconsistent with a report finding and recommendations. In each instance,
we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity
of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, we have
included “auditor’s comments” within the Office’s response to explain our
position. We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any
outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with the Office of the Governor.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MTROA and the Office of the Governor’s agreement to implement the audit
recommendations.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Dissolution
Chapter 111, Laws of Maryland 2023, effective June 1, 2023 established the
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority (MTROA) as a body
politic and corporate and an instrumentality of the State of Maryland. The
administrative affairs and activities of MTROA were directed and supervised by
an executive director who was appointed by the 13-member MTROA.
The 2025 Maryland Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act dissolved MTROA,
effective June 30, 2025. The Maryland Economic Development Corporation will
assume MTROA responsibilities for the horseracing operations and community
development projects; and the Maryland Stadium Authority will assume
responsibilities relating to planning, designing, constructing, and owning the
Pimlico Race Course (Pimlico) and a training facility. According to the State’s
records, MTROA’s expenditures for fiscal year 2025 totaled approximately $13.5
million (see Figure 1).
Figure 1
MTROA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Source
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 4
Vacant 1
Total 5
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 599,498
Technical and Special Fees 21,037
Operating Expenses 12,863,528
Total $13,484,063
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Source
Funding
Special Fund $13,484,063
Total $13,484,063
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
While in existence, MTROA was to maintain Maryland as a best-in-class
thoroughbred horse racing venue. To that end, the law authorized MTROA to:
• Study and make recommendations for the best interests of thoroughbred
racing;
• Develop new and existing horse racing and training facilities;
• Enter into agreements, leases, partnerships, or contracts necessary to support
and sustain Maryland thoroughbred racing and wagering activity; and
• Authorize or create a separate body, entity, or holding company to carry out
any provisions of the statute.
In January 2024, MTROA submitted the Pimlico Plus Plan report to the General
Assembly. The report recommended the consolidation of racing at Pimlico in
Baltimore City and that the State develop and own a training facility. Based in
part on the Pimlico Plus Plan report, the General Assembly passed legislation that
transferred ownership and operation of a thoroughbred racing facility in the State
from private ownership to MTROA.
In May 2024, the Board of Public Works (BPW) approved the transfer and
ownership of Pimlico from the private ownership by 1/ST Racing to MTROA for
$1. The approval also included a lease agreement between 1/ST Racing and
MTROA for use of Laurel Park while Pimlico was being renovated and
transferred the right to conduct thoroughbred horse activities in Maryland to
MTROA on January 1, 2025.1
On September 12, 2024, MTROA created The Maryland Jockey Club2 (TMJC) as
a not-for-profit entity to manage the State’s day-to-day thoroughbred operations,
wagering activity, and racing and community development projects on the State’s
behalf. TMJC began administering thoroughbred racing in Maryland effective
January 1, 2025. On January 2 ,2025, MTROA provided $10 million in working
capital to TMJC.
On May 7, 2025, after MTROA evaluated numerous sites, the BPW approved the
purchase of Shamrock Farms in Carroll County for $4.5 million for a training
facility. As of the time of our fieldwork, the purchase had not been finalized.
1 1/ST Racing agreed to conduct the Preakness in 2025 and 2026 to provide an orderly transition.
2 TMJC is similar in name to the former, for-profit Maryland Jockey Club operated by 1/ST
Racing.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope
As noted above, this audit includes the operation of MTROA from its inception
on June 1, 2023 through its dissolution effective June 30, 2025. During its
existence, the primary activity of the MTROA related to obtaining ownership of
Pimlico on behalf of the State, identifying a training facility site, a $10 million
transfer of working capital to TMJC, and establishment and monitoring of various
consulting contracts to further the planning, design, and development of Pimlico.
As a result, our audit included a review of the following:
• MTROA Board Meeting minutes for informational purposes
• The MTROA plan for Maryland racing moving forward that resulted in the
aforementioned Pimlico Plus Plan
• The acquisition of Pimlico on behalf of the State that was approved by BPW
and the master agreement between MTROA and 1/ST Racing
• The results of evaluations of potential training facility sites3
This audit also included a review of certain consultant contracts entered into by
MTROA based on significance and materiality. According to MTROA
management, much of MTROA’s time between January 2024 and June 2025,
related to establishing TMJC and determining best approaches in areas such as
clubhouse design, track layout, seating, amenities, parking needs, and
consideration of events beyond racing.
While our audit included a review of the TMJC Articles of Incorporation to
determine if operating agreements were in place between MTROA and TMJC,
our audit did not include a review of TMJC operations, financial activity, or
procedures and controls. Effective July 1, 2025, TMJC operates under the
authority of the Maryland Economic Development Corporation.
3 The determination of the final training facility site was not part of our audit objectives.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Long-Term Operating Agreement
Finding 1
The Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority (MTROA) did
not establish written agreements with the Maryland Jockey Club (TMJC)
governing the terms of its $10 million working capital advance and each
entities roles and responsibilities for the management and operations of the
Pimlico Race Course (Pimlico) and training facilities.
Analysis
MTROA did not establish written agreements with TMJC governing the terms of
the $10 million working capital advance it made to TMJC in January 2025.4
MTROA also did not establish a long-term operating agreement (LTOA)
governing each entities roles and responsibilities for the management and
operations of the Pimlico and training facilities. We were advised by MTROA
management that it began working on an agreement with TMJC in November
2024; but was unable to finalize the agreement prior to its sunset in June 2025.
State law authorizing the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) to issue State
bonds to finance the construction of racing facilities also required the execution of
an LTOA5 to clarify the State’s financial relationship with TMJC. In addition, a
June 2025 sunset transition memo sent by MTROA to the State agencies that will
assume responsibility for the TMJC activity further enumerated the need for an
agreement. Specifically, the memo stated that “MTROA has made multiple
unsuccessful efforts to get this [agreement] accomplished. The absence of the
agreements has implications for TMJC’s 501(c)(4) status, potentially the tax
treatment that will be afforded MSA’s bonds and obviously in the long term
should financial difficulties or conflicts of intent arise.”
A written agreement with TMJC is also important because the General Assembly
has authorized up to $527 million for the redevelopment of Pimlico and its
training facility which TMJC operates. Furthermore, per State law,6 the State is
responsible for operational losses related to these venues.
4 According to a draft of the written agreement prepared in February 2025, the $10 million was
characterized as an operating loan for working capital.
5 Initially, State law required the LTOA to be completed prior to the issuance of bonds. However,
with the passage of House Bill 352 in 2025, the requirement for a LTOA remains, but it is not a
requirement before the issuance of bonds.
6 State Government 9-1A-28 (b)(3)(iv).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Our review of LTOAs between two other states and their racetrack operators, and
LTOAs created by another State agency identified language that would help the
State ensure its financial investments and interests are protected. For example,
the LTOAs included State oversight and specific conditions for revenue contracts
(including concessionaires), sponsorships, procurements, debt, and audit and
inspection rights. Moreover, it would be beneficial for certain key fiscal matters
to be clarified, such as the terms of the aforementioned $10 million working
capital advance. This would also include the State’s role with the TMJC’s budget
process, financial and operational reporting, insurance policies and coverage,
naming rights, and default scenarios.
Recommendation 1
We recommend the State enter into a LTOA with TMJC for both Pimlico
and the training facility including the financial arrangement regarding the
$10 million advance, controls to establish oversight and accountability over
TMJC’s work, and other key fiscal matters noted above.
Consulting Contracts
Background
State law exempted MTROA from most provisions of State procurement law.
However, MTROA did not establish its own written procurement policies and
procedures, as required by State law. During our audit period, MTROA procured
17 contracts with related expenditures7 totaling $2.5 million, of which 13
contracts with related expenditures totaling $2.4 million were consulting
contracts. The consulting contracts were for areas such as design, planning,
economic development, marketing, branding, and accounting services. With the
dissolution of MTROA, the Maryland Stadium Authority notified several
consulting contractors that work on their contracts was being suspended.
7 Due to certain contracts not having a not-to-exceed amount or other definitive contract terms
such as maximum number of hours, we could not readily determine the total dollar amount of the
contracts procured.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 2
MTROA procured consulting contracts without ensuring that they were the
best value, had clearly defined deliverables and deadlines, and that the
related invoices were appropriate to pay.
Analysis
MTROA procured consulting contracts without ensuring that they were the best
value, had clearly defined deliverables and deadlines, and that the related invoices
were appropriate to pay. Our test of five material consulting contracts procured
between July 2023 and July 2024 with expenditures totaling approximately $1.9
million disclosed the following:
• MTROA did not competitively procure these contracts and could not
document that it ensured the related pricing was reasonable. For example,
MTROA awarded a $1.1 million contract in June 2024 for consulting services
for the design, planning, and development of Pimlico. While MTROA
management advised that this vendor was selected because of its specialized
experience, MTROA procured this contract without seeking vendors other
than the awardee and accepted the vendor’s pricing without assessing its
reasonableness. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that the State
received the best value for the services provided.
• MTROA did not ensure that four of the contracts with expenditures totaling
$1.3 million included clearly defined deliverables and deadlines. For
example, one contract included the following language as a deliverable -
“provide continuous and intense focus on the project until its completion in
2027”. In addition, while the contract required the vendor to provide
recommendations in multiple areas, it did not specify how the
recommendations were to be documented (such as in written reports or
surveys) and did not include deadlines for implementation. MTROA
management advised us that while it was aware that the vendor had made
recommendations, it did not have any documentation of these
recommendations.
• Invoices were not sufficiently comprehensive to enable MTROA personnel to
determine that amounts invoiced were proper and that services were received
prior to payment. For example, the aforementioned contract was billed on a
monthly fixed fee basis, but the invoices did not include any detail or
description of the work performed.
Without defined deliverables, deadlines, and detailed invoices, there was a
lack of assurance that invoices were appropriate to pay and that the services
8

--- Page 11 ---
were provided. As of June 2025, payments to this vendor totaled
approximately $413,000.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the State
a. ensure that consulting contracts provide the best value, including seeking
multiple vendors and assessing the reasonableness of vendor pricing;
b. ensure that consulting contracts include clearly defined deliverables (for
example documented work products) with deadlines or timelines for
completion;
c. ensure that invoices are sufficiently comprehensive and verified prior to
payment; and
d. investigate the propriety of the aforementioned invoices to ensure services
were provided and recover any unsupported payments.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Thoroughbred
Racetrack Operating Authority (MTROA) for the period beginning June 1, 2023
and ending June 30, 2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MTROA’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, examination of
critical agreements, accounts receivable, corporate purchasing cards and
equipment.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by the Maryland
Department of Labor (MDL) – Office of the Secretary predominantly from June
1, 2023 to March 2025. These support services (such as payroll, maintenance of
9

--- Page 12 ---
accounting records, and related fiscal functions including vendor payments) are
included within the scope of our audits of the MDL - Office of the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on MTROA’s procedures and
controls in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other
auditing procedures were focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 1, 2023 to June 30, 2025, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MTROA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MTROA’s management was responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MTROA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MTROA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MTROA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the Governor’s Office, on behalf of MTROA, to our findings
and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise the Governor’s Office regarding the results of our
review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
October 8, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find responses to the audit report from the Office of Legislative Audits
for the Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority (“MTROA”), covering agency
operations from its inception on June 1, 2023 through its dissolution on June 30, 2025.
If you have any additional questions or concerns, please do not hesitate to contact me at
manny.welsh@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Emmanuel M. Welsh
Deputy Chief of Staff
Office of the Governor
CC: Craig A. Thompson, Chair, Maryland Stadium Authority
Michael Frenz, Executive Director, Maryland Stadium Authority
Tom Sadowski, Executive Director, Maryland Economic Development Corp.

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority
Agency Response Form
Long-Term Operating Agreement
Finding 1
The Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority (MTROA) did
not establish written agreements with the Maryland Jockey Club (TMJC)
governing the terms of its $10 million working capital advance and each
entities roles and responsibilities for the management and operations of the
Pimlico Race Course (Pimlico) and training facilities.
We recommend the State enter into a LTOA with TMJC for both Pimlico
and the training facility including the financial arrangement regarding the
$10 million advance, controls to establish oversight and accountability over
TMJC’s work, and other key fiscal matters noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate (In Part)
Please provide While documentation provided to – and information shared with – OLA
additional comments as suggests that it was the intent of MTROA to treat the $10 million
deemed necessary. working capital to TMJC as a loan, Chapter 410 of 2024 does not
specify that the working capital authorized in the law be treated as one.
As the MTROA Board did not conduct a vote on any agreements to
clarify that the working capital was to be treated as a loan advance, or
finalize any terms for repayment, the Office respectfully disagrees with
the characterization of the working capital as an “advance.”
Recommendation 1 Disagree (In Part) Estimated Completion Date: 1/2026
Please provide details of An operating agreement is currently under development with the
corrective action or coordination of counsel for TMJC’s responsibilities related to
explain disagreement. thoroughbred horse racing at Pimlico race course. We do however agree
that MTROA should have executed their agreement with TMJC prior to
January 1, 2025. We are in progress of expeditiously finalizing a new
agreement that will include financial and operational reporting, audit and
inspection rights, insurance policies and coverage, naming rights, and
default scenarios prior to calendar year end.
As stated previously, we disagree with the characterization of the $10
million working capital authorized in Chapter 410 of 2025 as an
“advance.” We will, however, commit to clarifying the terms and
expectations for the $10 million working capital authorized for TMJC.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority
Agency Response Form
MSA acquired the training facility in August 2025. The training facility
is being planned and developed as a separate project, and therefore, it
would not be feasible to enter into an agreement for training facility
operations at this time.
Auditor’s Comment: While the Office of the Governor appears to agree with
the recommendations, it disagrees with our use of the term ‘advance’ in our
analysis, noting that the related legislation does not specify that the working
capital authorized in the law be treated as a loan. However, as noted in Footnote
4, a draft of the written agreement prepared in February 2025 referred to the $10
million as an operating loan and as such, this description was included in our
analysis. This terminology is also consistent with the description of the $10
million provided to us by MTROA management during our audit.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority
Agency Response Form
Consulting Contracts
Finding 2
MTROA procured consulting contracts without ensuring that they were the
best value, had clearly defined deliverables and deadlines, and that the
related invoices were appropriate to pay.
We recommend that the State
a. ensure that consulting contracts provide the best value, including seeking
multiple vendors and assessing the reasonableness of vendor pricing;
b. ensure that consulting contracts include clearly defined deliverables (for
example documented work products) with deadlines or timelines for
completion;
c. ensure that invoices are sufficiently comprehensive and verified prior to
payment; and
d. investigate the propriety of the aforementioned invoices to ensure services
were provided and recover any unsupported payments.
Agency Response
Analysis Accurate
Please provide While the Governor’s Office cannot speak to the oversight practices
additional comments as prior to the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025 that
deemed necessary. dissolved MTROA effective June 30, 2025, the Office is actively
working with the agencies that assumed responsibilities to ensure that
proper processes, controls, and oversight functions are being conducted
for future procurement contracts.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details of As stated in the background, with the dissolution of MTROA, the
corrective action or Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) notified several consulting
explain disagreement. contractors that work on their contracts was being suspended (which
occurred in June 2025). MTROA Contracts were terminated July 2025,
and any future services shall be procured by MSA or the Maryland
Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO) in accordance with
State procurement law and the respective procurement policies of MSA
or MEDCO, as the circumstances may require.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of We agree that all contracts should include clearly defined deliverables.
corrective action or However, by nature, certain consulting services often may not be able to
explain disagreement. specify deadlines or timelines dependent on the complexity of the
subject matter. Certain contracts examined by OLA were retained to
provide as-needed expert analyses to MTROA.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details of Future invoices will be reviewed to ensure they sufficiently described
corrective action or the details of the goods or services being paid including the date that the
explain disagreement. goods and services were rendered, and the date of invoice.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2026
Please provide details of MSA initiated investigation of the invoices provided by OLA when
corrective action or received in September 2025. To support MSA in this investigation, MSA
explain disagreement. has brought in an in-house auditor. Due to the contracts lacking clearly
defined deliverables as detailed in the finding, the investigation
completion date is currently unknown. However, any improper payments
identified by the investigation will be pursued for recovery.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 19 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Jonathan D. Souders
Staff Auditors