Title: Kent County Public Schools
Date: 2025-10-30
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=69093b55e7340f50f42e3fe0
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:12:21.299367
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Kent County Public Schools
October 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 30, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Kent County
Public Schools (KCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether KCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that KCPS did not properly perform and document bid
evaluations, resulting in a lack of assurance that three contracts tested totaling
$12.2 million were awarded to the most qualified vendor at the most
advantageous price. Additionally, KCPS’ Procurement Procedures did not
incorporate certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices for
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements. This
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report but not corrected.
Furthermore, KCPS did not always obtain Board approval, execute written
contracts, prepare written justifications, and publish contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage for sole source procurements.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our

--- Page 4 ---
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit disclosed that KCPS did not ensure critical human resources
and payroll transactions were independently reviewed for propriety and did not
adequately monitor the performance of its third-party administrator that provides
health care claims processing services. These conditions were identified in our
two prior audits but not corrected.
KCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of KCPS’ response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to our findings and
related recommendations, and while KCPS generally agrees with the
recommendations in this report, we identified certain instances in which
statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the report findings. In
each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within
KCPS’ response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
KCPS.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
KCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 9
External Audits 10
Cybersecurity Incident 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Revenue and Billing Cycle 13
Federal Funds 13
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Kent County Public Schools (KCPS) did not properly 16
perform and document bid evaluations resulting in a lack of
assurance that three contracts tested totaling $12.2 million were
awarded to the most qualified vendor at the most advantageous
price.
* Finding 2 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 17
practices were not incorporated into KCPS’ written Procurement
Procedures and were not consistently used when participating in
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Finding 3 – KCPS did not always obtain Board approval, execute 19
written contracts, prepare written justifications, and publish contract
awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage for non-competitive
procurements.
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 4 – KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll 20
transactions were independently reviewed for propriety.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Finding 5 – KCPS did not establish adequate accountability and control 21
over its equipment.
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 22
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 23
Transportation Services 23
Food Services 24
School Board Oversight 24
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 9 – KCPS did not adequately monitor its third-party 26
administrator to verify the propriety of amounts paid, compliance with
performance measures, and the eligibility of enrolled dependents.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 28
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Kent County Public Schools (KCPS) ranks
24th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2024 full-time student enrollment was 1,732 students. KCPS had 5
schools, consisting of 3 elementary, 1 middle school, and 1 high school.
Funding
KCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Kent County, the State,
and federal government. According to the KCPS’ audited financial statements,
revenues from all sources totaled approximately $44.8 million in fiscal year 2024,
including $16 million from the State. See Figure 1 for KCPS’ enrollment and
funding by source for the six-year period from fiscal year 2019 through fiscal year
2024. See Figure 2 for revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year 2024
according to its audited financial statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
KCPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2019 through 2024
(dollar amounts in millions)
1,912 1,918
1,812
1,786
1,751
1,732
$23
$20 $21 $20 $20
$18
$16 $16
$15
$14
$13
$12
$9 $9
$7
$4 $4 $4
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Enrollment Local State Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2024 included :
• $11.1 million for Foundation Formula Grants
• $1.6 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
• $1.1 million for Capital Projects
• $2.2 million for Other State funding
Source: KCPS’ Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
KCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2024
Other
$331
1%
Federal
$4,849
19%
Local
$11,449
44%
State
$9,218
36%
Source: Source: KCPS’ Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty Aid, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
additional funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as
Prekindergarten Aid).
Expenditures
According to KCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2024 expenditures
were approximately $44.8 million. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 80 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2024. According to MSDE records, during
the 2023-2024 school year, KCPS had 322 full-time equivalent positions, which
consisted of 221 instructional and 101 non-instructional positions. Instruction
accounted for 55 percent of KCPS’ expenditures on a categorical basis (see Figure
3).
Figure 3
KCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2024
(dollar amounts in millions)
$25
Instruction
55%
$7
Administration and Support
15%
Enrollment
1,732
$4
Special Education
10%
Employees
$4
Facilities and Capital Projects
10% 322
$2
Transportation
Cost Per Pupil
6%
$25,872
$2
Food Service
4%
Source: KCPS’ Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
8

--- Page 11 ---
Oversight
KCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and a non-voting student member. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of KCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with KCPS to comply with
the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Kent County government also
exercises authority over KCPS primarily through the review and approval of
KCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a seven-member
Board appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
Board Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker
of the House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, MSDE, and the Interagency Commission on School
Construction. Specifically, the law provides that the OIGE may receive and
investigate information and complaints concerning potential fraud, waste, and
abuse of public funds and property; civil rights violations involving students or
employees; whether policies and procedures governing the prevention and
reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with applicable federal and State
laws; and compliance with other applicable federal and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
9

--- Page 12 ---
review, the OIGE issued one public report related to KCPS reviews and
investigations. We considered the report during our current audit.
External Audits
As required by State law, KCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of KCPS as of June 30, 2019, 2020,
2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024, and the respective changes in its financial position
and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
KCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of KCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independent audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
KCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance
to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the
entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2019 through 2024 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2024 audits, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the
following areas:
• State and local government revenues received via electronic fund transfer
• Accounts receivable
• Federal grant activity
10

--- Page 13 ---
Cybersecurity Incident
On December 28, 2024, a KCPS vendor became aware of a cybersecurity incident
involving the unauthorized transfers of current and former student and educator
personal information. The breach effected numerous vendor customers including
other Maryland school districts. Compromised information included names,
contact information, birthdates, medical information, and social security numbers.
The vendor had obtained an independent review over its controls in 2024 and its
related System and Organization Controls report did not identify any significant
operational or security-related concerns.
KCPS learned their information was involved in the breach on January 7, 2025
and alerted the students and educators about the security breach on January 10,
2025. The vendor also reached out directly to individuals affected by the breach
and is offering credit monitoring services to those impacted.
On March 7, 2025 the vendor released an investigation report sharing attack
details but did not include the number of records or how many customers were
affected. As of July 2025 the vendor’s incident investigation was still ongoing
and KCPS has received no further details about its affected data.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in the July 6, 2020 report. See Figure 4 for the results of our review.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 1 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
KCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive, as they did not incorporate certain best
practices for consideration when evaluating possible Repeated
Finding 2
participation in an intergovernmental cooperative (Current Finding 2)
purchasing agreement. In addition, KCPS did not obtain
contract copies to verify invoice pricing.
KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and
payroll transactions were independently reviewed for Repeated
Finding 3
propriety, and salary increases were not always approved (Current Finding 4)
by the Board as required.
Finding 4 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 5 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Financial disclosure statements were not filed or did not
include all required information, and an ethics panel had
Finding 6 Not repeated
not been established in accordance with KCPS’ ethics
policy.
KCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and
retiree health care claims paid and did not verify plan
administrative fees were properly charged. In addition, Repeated
Finding 7
KCPS did not obtain copies or Board approval of the (Current Finding 9)
annual third-party administrator administrative
agreements.
2 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
have been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Kent County Public Schools (KCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds received
from Kent County, the State and the federal government. According to KCPS'
audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately
$44.8 million in fiscal year 2024, including $16 million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited KCPS' financial statements and the objectives
of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via
electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor's
procedural review (related to the fiscal year 2024 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2024, school
activity collections totaled $167,000 and the June 30, 2024 fund balance was
$197,000. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of this activity,
we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
Federal Funds
Background
KCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to KCPS' Single Audit, fiscal year
2024 (latest available at time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled $8 million,
13

--- Page 16 ---
not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid
reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $3.5 million in fiscal year 2020 to $8 million in fiscal
year 2024 (128.5 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
Specifically, according to KCPS' records, as of October 30, 2024, KCPS was
awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $15.8 million to be
distributed over federal fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental
Appropriations Act, and the American Rescue Plan.
As of October 29, 2024, according to KCPS records, expenditures related to these
COVID-19 grants totaled $14.5 million, from January 2020 to October 2024 and
were primarily comprised of staffing, instructional software and materials, and
laptops. On March 28, 2025, the United States Department of Education (DOE)
notified every State that it was ending the liquidation period for COVID-19 grants
effective immediately. The DOE notification indicated that it would consider an
extension to the liquidation period on an individual project specific basis. KCPS
advised us that it had expended all funds as of March 28, 2025.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of KCPS' federal grants and the objectives of our
audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on KCPS compliance with
the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2019 through 2024. Our review of
the Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in this
report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
KCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to KCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
Maryland State Department of Education’s (MSDE's) Interagency Medicaid
Monitoring Team issued a report in November 2024 of the results of its review of
35 student case files for 85 criteria. The report did not specifically address the
propriety of Medicaid billing but overall concluded that KCPS was generally
14

--- Page 17 ---
compliant with most criteria. For example, KCPS was 100 percent compliant
with 63 criteria and from 84 to 99 percent compliant with 13 criteria.
According to KCPS records, fiscal year 2024 state and federal reimbursements for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $425,300, which was an
increase of $49,000 from the previous fiscal year. Based on our current
assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives, our audit did
not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in the federal fund area, including policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and KCPS’ records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $9.1 million during fiscal year 2024. KCPS uses a
combination of manual and automated methods to process purchases and
disbursements. Requisitions are manually created and approved by a supervisor
in the requesting department. Approved requisitions are then entered into the
financial management system and converted to purchase orders by the Finance
Office, which also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors to the requesting school or department for
approval and then forwarded to the Finance Office, where they are manually
matched to appropriate purchasing documents and verification of receipt. Once
approved, the Finance Office enters the invoice into the financial management
system. The system then prints vendor checks and posts the payment to the
financial records.
Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that procurements equal to or exceeding $100,000 (prior to October 1,
2023, the amount was $50,000) be competitively bid, and KCPS Procurement
Procedures require that procurements of contracts and agreements valued at
$100,000 or more, be approved by the Kent County Board of Education (the
Board).
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 1
KCPS did not properly perform and document bid evaluations resulting in a
lack of assurance that three contracts tested totaling $12.2 million were
awarded to the most qualified vendor at the most advantageous price.
Analysis
KCPS did not properly perform and document bid evaluations resulting in a lack
of assurance that contracts were awarded to the appropriate vendors. KCPS’
Procurement Procedures provided for the award of contracts to the lowest
responsible and responsive bidder that meet the requirements in the Invitation for
Bid (IFB) and had the competency and ability to perform the service. We
reviewed three competitively procured contract awards related to facility
improvements or renovations (selected based on materiality) made during fiscal
years 2020 to 2024, totaling $12.2 million.
Our review disclosed that for all three contracts the evaluation committee
members did not have a schedule listing each criteria in the IFB with comments or
rankings by each of the members to justify the award. For example, the IFB for
two contract awards required prospective vendors to demonstrate qualification to
perform the service and have experience based on references of work performed
on similar projects. KCPS did not maintain documentation that each member
evaluated these criteria or the related impact it had on the award decisions. This
lack of comprehensive documentation raises concerns with the propriety of one of
the aforementioned tested contracts.
Specifically, KCPS awarded a $7 million contract to replace the roof of a school
to the vendor with the second lowest bid ($508,600 more than the lowest bidder)
because it received negative feedback from the lowest bidder’s references. There
was no documentation of how each member evaluated the criteria for this award
in the IFB which included the results of the references, a requirement for 10 years
of experience and certain certifications.
In this regard, our review disclosed that the support for the negative feedback
consisted of an email from a KCPS employee summarizing a conversation with a
reference that did not include the name of the individual providing the negative
feedback or the nature of the project the vendor worked on. Furthermore, the
vendor selected for the contract award did not have the required 10 years of
experience or documentation that it was certified by the manufacturer as required
by the IFB. There was no documentation to support whether the evaluation
committee considered these items when making the award and as a result, there is
a lack of assurance that the award was made to the most qualified vendor at the
most advantageous price.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that KCPS
a. establish procedures to document that each committee member’s
evaluation of vendor bids is consistent with the criteria established in the
IFB; and
b. maintain detailed support for all information used during the bid
evaluation, such as reference checks.
Finding 2
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into KCPS’ written Procurement Procedures and were not
consistently used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPAs).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into KCPS’ written Procurement Procedures and were not
consistently used by KCPS when participating in ICPAs.3 State law, which legal
counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is applicable to local
education agencies, provides for the participation in an existing State or local
contract, if the governing body of the entity determines that (a) participation
would provide a cost savings in purchase price or administrative burden; or (b)
further other policy goals including operational and energy–efficiency goals
related to the purchase, operation, or maintenance of the supply or service.
Our review of KCPS’ Procurement Procedures and purchasing manual disclosed
that they did not include the above statutory requirements as well as the following
critical best practices.
• Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
• Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs;
• Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties;
3 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a
certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract and at
least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings
that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to
all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article of the Code, provides that local education agencies do not need
to conduct competitive procurements for goods and commodities if they use a contract awarded by
public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing organizations and the originating procuring
agency followed public bidding procedures.
17

--- Page 20 ---
• Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised;
• Verify terms, scope of services, specifications and price meet our needs;
• Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
• Obtain a copy of ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification.
We could not obtain the total number or value of contracts awarded via ICPAs
since KCPS did not capture this information. Based on our review of material
payments to vendors, we identified six ICPAs during fiscal years 2022 through
2025, with spending totaling $3.8 million between July 2022 and September
2024. Our test of these ICPAs disclosed that KCPS did not adhere to the statutory
requirements and certain of the aforementioned best practices (for example,
research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs) for any of the ICPAs tested.
We did find that other best practices were performed despite not being included in
KCPS’ policies. For example, KCPS verified that the ICPA solicitation was
competitively bid and publicly advertised for four of the six ICPAs noted above.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require actions included in the aforementioned list.
Incorporating ICPA best practices into KCPS Procurement Procedures could help
ensure they are consistently used.
Similar conditions regarding KCPS Procurement Procedures and documentation
related to ICPAs were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, KCPS stated it would implement our recommendations.
However, as noted above, KCPS did not implement the corrective actions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that KCPS
a. incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirements and other
identified and acknowledged best practices into its Procurement
Procedures (repeat),
b. ensure that the performance of the requirements and best practices are
documented when evaluating and participating in ICPAs (repeat), and
c. maintain a comprehensive list of all contracts awarded under an ICPA.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 3
KCPS did not always obtain Board approval, execute written contracts,
prepare written justifications, and publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) for non-competitive procurements.
Analysis
KCPS did not always obtain Board approval, execute written contracts, prepare
written justifications, for non-competitive procurements, and publish contract
awards on eMMA.4 Our test of seven vendors to which KCPS had paid
approximately $3.3 million for various products and services such as special
education and health services,5 disclosed the following:
• KCPS did not obtain Board approval for services received from any of these
vendors, each of which exceeded $100,000.
• KCPS did not execute written contracts for services from four of the vendors
with payments totaling $1.3 million.
• KCPS could not document either a competitive procurement process or
provide written justification for a non-competitive procurement process for
four of the vendors with payments totaling $2.4 million.
• KCPS did not publish awards on eMMA as required for six of the vendors
with payments totaling $3.1 million.
KCPS’ Procurement Procedures requires that contracts equal to or exceeding
$100,000 shall be reviewed and approved by the Board and have written
justifications for sole source contracts. Additionally, State law requires the
solicitation and award of contracts of $100,000 or more (prior to October 1, 2023
the amount was $50,000) procured by public schools after July 1, 2022 to be
published on eMMA. Publishing contract awards on eMMA provides transparency
over State procurements, including information about winning bidders and the
amount of the related awards.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that KCPS comply with its Procurement Procedures and
State law when procuring non-competitive contracts including
a. obtaining Board approval;
4 eMMA is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
5 Test items were selected based on procurement type and materiality. The related payments were
made between July 2022 and September 2024.
19

--- Page 22 ---
b. entering into written contracts;
c. preparing written justifications; and
d. publishing contract awards and procurement awards on eMMA as
required, including those noted above.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the KCPS budget.
According to KCPS’ records, fiscal year 2024 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $35.7 million, representing 80 percent of total expenditures.
According to MSDE reports, during the 2023-2024 school year, KCPS had 322
full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 221 instructional and 101 non-
instructional positions.
KCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. One system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information). A badge scanning system is used for most full-time
employees to record employee time and create electronic bi-weekly timesheets for
on-line supervisory approval, while manual timesheets are used for the remaining
employees. A third system is used to track employee leave usage.
Finding 4
KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety. For example, KCPS did not use available
system reports to perform independent documented reviews of new hires, other
earnings transactions, and pay rate increases. Although a supervisory review was
performed on a test basis to identify rate increases and new hires, the review was
not independent and comprehensive. Specifically, the supervisor conducting the
review could also process payroll adjustments (such as, other earnings) and did
not review supporting documentation to verify the accuracy of the adjustments.
Our test of 15 human resources and payroll transactions (selected based on
materiality and various other factors including position classification and salary)
20

--- Page 23 ---
did not disclose any improper transactions. According to KCPS’ records, salary
increases totaled $1.1 million in fiscal year 2024.
Similar conditions were noted in our two preceding audit reports dating back to
May 2013. KCPS’ response to our prior report indicated that any changes to bi-
weekly payroll would be reviewed by a supervisor utilizing supporting
documentation and that the process would be assessed to ensure separation of
duties are implemented by January 2020. However, as noted above, the review
was not performed by an independent employee and did not include supporting
documentation.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that KCPS perform independent supervisory reviews of
changes processed for the bi-weekly payroll, at least on a test basis, by
agreeing changes to appropriate supporting documentation (repeat).
We advised KCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to KCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital inventory (furniture, fixtures, vehicles, and equipment) totaled $9.1
million as of June 30, 2024. KCPS maintains centralized automated records for
all equipment with a cost of $5,000 or more for financial statement purposes. In
addition, KCPS’ Office of Technology Services maintains an inventory database
of all sensitive items such as laptop computers and other mobile equipment (such
as tablets and video cameras), regardless of cost, assigned to schools, students,
and employees. KCPS has established written equipment policies.
Finding 5
KCPS did not establish adequate accountability and control over its
equipment.
Analysis
KCPS did not establish adequate accountability and control over its equipment.
For example, our review disclosed that 83 percent of the 9,005 items on the KCPS
inventory records as of March 2025 did not contain the location of the items
including the school (17 percent) or the room number (66 percent) where the
equipment was located. In addition, KCPS did not conduct any independent
21

--- Page 24 ---
annual physical inventories of its capital equipment during the audit period as
required by Board Procedures. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all
equipment was properly accounted for.
Our test of 9 equipment items6 totaling $6,900, disclosed that KCPS could not
locate these items. KCPS advised us that it believed most of the equipment items
over 10 years old had been recycled but could not provide us documentation such
as a disposal form, to support this assertion.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that KCPS establish adequate controls over its equipment
including maintaining comprehensive records and conducting periodic
physical inventories.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 6
through 8 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with KCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
6 Test items were selected from KCPS inventory records as of March 2025 and were selected
because they either did not have a location listed or were over 10 years old.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
KCPS employs a staff of 16 employees to maintain its five schools and a number
of other facilities (such as administrative and support offices). According to
KCPS’ fiscal year 2026 Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to KCPS’ facilities over the next six
years are estimated to cost $23.9 million.
Our review of four construction-related procurements (selected based on
materiality) awarded during fiscal years 2020 to 2024 totaling approximately
$12.5 million disclosed that one contract was not properly procured as an ICPA
(this test item was included in Finding 2). In addition, our test of 11 invoices
totaling $4.4 million for these contracts, disclosed that the invoices were properly
reviewed and approved, and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with the
related contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
KCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and
minimize energy costs. For example, KCPS provides preventative maintenance
of its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing emergency repairs. In
addition, KCPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore area entities
to purchase energy at the best possible terms. According to consortium records
(which we did not audit), KCPS saved approximately $277,000 through energy
cost avoidance from fiscal years 2016 to 2024. Also, KCPS reviews utility
billings to monitor energy usage and related costs.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of KCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for facilities
construction, renovation, and maintenance. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by MSDE, KCPS has approximately 1,478
students eligible to receive student transportation services during fiscal year 2024.
These students were transported using 18 system-owned buses and 4 contractor-
owned buses. KCPS reported that 594,800 route miles were traveled to transport
23

--- Page 26 ---
students for the 2023-2024 school year. According to KCPS’ records, fiscal year
2024 transportation costs totaled approximately $2.4 million.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions in the transportation services
area.
Food Services
Background
According to KCPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled approximately $1.7 million in fiscal year 2024, and were
primarily funded with federal funds totaling $1.5 million. The federal funds are
received from the United States Department of Agriculture based on an
established rate per meals served. KCPS is allowed to retain federal funds it
receives in excess of its annual food service operating costs to be used to offset
certain future food service operating costs. According to KCPS’ audited financial
statements, the balance in KCPS’ Food and Nutrition Services Fund totaled
$260,700 as of June 30, 2024.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to Food Services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Kent County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five elected
members and one non-voting student representative. The Board contracted with a
certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits of the KCPS
financial statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight of various
areas of KCPS operation and governance, the Board has established several
committees, such as an Ethics Panel and a Citizens Advisory Council, which is a
structured group that provides advice to the Board on certain issues.
KCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and was
approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both Board
members and KCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of interest
24

--- Page 27 ---
and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees. Specifically,
annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by Board members,
candidates for the Board, appointed officials (such as the Superintendent), and
other administrators (such as supervisors) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, KCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
three members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and KCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2023 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions in the school board oversight
area.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
KCPS is a member of the Eastern Shore of Maryland Educational Consortium for
employee and retiree health care. The Consortium members are self-insured for
healthcare costs up to a designated stop-loss amount ($175,000 per KCPS’
participant per plan year). The Consortium contracts with a third-party
administrator (TPA) for health care claims processing services for employee
medical (including prescription costs), dental and vision, and for stop-loss
insurance coverage. The TPA bills KCPS monthly subscription charges based on
the number of participants and their medical coverage. Medical providers submit
claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of KCPS. KCPS pays its TPA an
administrative fee for these services.
As of June 2025, KCPS provided health insurance benefits to 837 enrolled
employees, dependents, and retirees. According to the TPA’s records for the plan
year ended August 31, 2024, KCPS healthcare expenditures totaled approximately
$4.3 million, including administrative fees totaling $140,000, and stop-loss
insurance coverage totaling $363,000.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 9
KCPS did not adequately monitor its TPA to verify the propriety of amounts
paid, compliance with performance measures, and the eligibility of enrolled
dependents.
Analysis
KCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA to verify the
propriety of amounts paid, compliance with performance measures and the
eligibility of enrolled dependents.
• KCPS did not verify that administrative fees and monthly subscription fees
billed by the TPA for medical coverage agreed with its payroll records for
enrolled employees. In addition, the monthly premium rates charged (health
plan cost per person) for the various medical coverage categories and stop-
loss insurance were not verified for agreement with the related available
contracts maintained on file. Our review, based on the listed participant
counts on certain monthly invoices and the related contract rates, did not
disclose significant variances.
• KCPS did not obtain support for the 2024 annual settlement paid to the TPA
which totaled approximately $184,500. In the year-end settlement process,
the TPA compares the medical claims paid against the monthly subscription
charges paid by KCPS to determine any excess amount due from or to be
reimbursed. Our review disclosed that KCPS did not receive detailed claims
data from the TPA to verify the propriety of the settlement amount.
• KCPS did not audit, or otherwise verify, the accuracy of TPA self-reported
compliance with performance measures. The TPA healthcare contract
included 18 performance measures relating to implementation, network
maintenance, customer service, and claims processing. Additionally, the
contract allowed for the assessment of penalties up to $290,904 annually, if
the TPA did not meet the performance measures. The medical TPA reported
self-assessed penalties of $8,432 in calendar year 2024 based on its reported
compliance, but KCPS did not have a process to verify the TPA’s reported
compliance.
• KCPS did not maintain documentation that it verified the eligibility of
enrolled dependents in its health plans, and did not perform an audit to ensure
enrolled dependents were still eligible. Although KCPS advised that it
requires employees to submit documentation (such as birth certificates) to add
dependents onto their health care plan, KCPS did not retain this
26

--- Page 29 ---
documentation. Our test of 10 arbitrarily selected employees7 with dependent
coverage disclosed that no documentation (such as birth and marriage
certificates) was retained to support the eligibility of their 26 dependents.
A similar condition regarding the verification of administrative and monthly
subscription fees, and the year-end settlement was commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports dating back to May 2013. In its response to the prior
report, KCPS indicated that it would verify enrolled employees in the payroll
system and contract rates to ensure the accuracy of TPA invoices. Although
KCPS obtained a claims audit in March 2023 to help ensure the propriety of
claims payments in plan year 2022, KCPS did not implement other processes to
determine the accuracy of TPA invoices, including fees and the year-end
settlement.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that KCPS
a. compare its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and contract
rates to determine the propriety of related administrative fees and
monthly subscription fees billed (repeat);
b. obtain documentation to support claim payments and any additional
information on the end of year settlement (repeat);
c. establish a process to independently verify, at least annually, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met; and
d. maintain documentation to support the eligibility of dependents claimed
by enrolled health care program participants.
7 Test selection was made from all employees who were hired between June 2022 and July 2025.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Kent County Public Schools
(KCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which generally
requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school systems to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management practices. This
performance audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the KCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the KCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of KCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas included revenue
and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements, human resources and
payroll, equipment control, information technology security and control, facilities,
transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the management of other
risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on KCPS dated July 6, 2020, was
limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of
the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the KCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
28

--- Page 31 ---
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by KCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
KCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of KCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2022 to September 30, 2024.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
KCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the KCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
KCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
29

--- Page 32 ---
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to KCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
KCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to KCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from September 2024 to August 2025. KCPS’
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise KCPS regarding the results of our review of its
response.
30

--- Page 33 ---
APPENDIX
ANCHORE
LENG
Kent County Board of Education
Growing a Community of Leaders
Dr. Mary Boswell-McComas
Office of the Superintendent
October 29, 2025
Brian S. Tanen
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: Kent County Public Schools OLA Audit Responses
Dear Mr. Tanen:
We are pleased to submit our Agency Response Form (ARF) to your organization for
the recently concluded Kent County Public Schools OLA Audit. We have attached the
required ARF to this Cover Letter.
It has been a pleasure working with your staff and we appreciate all the hard work
that goes into performing these audits. Please let us know if you need any additional
information from Kent County Public Schools.
Sincerely,
Mary
D. MeComas
Baowell
Dr. Mary Boswell-McComas
Superintendent of Schools
Enclosure
5608 Boundary Avenue Rock Hall, MD 21661 410-778-7113 (f) 410-778-6193

--- Page 34 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
KCPS did not properly perform and document bid evaluations resulting in a
lack of assurance that three contracts tested totaling $12.2 million were
awarded to the most qualified vendor at the most advantageous price.
We recommend that KCPS
a. establish procedures to document that each committee member’s
evaluation of vendor bids is consistent with the criteria established in the
IFB; and
b. maintain detailed support for all information used during the bid
evaluation, such as reference checks.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide KCPS does agree that additional documentation is needed moving
additional comments as forward in regards to the evaluation committee’s discussions and
deemed necessary. reference checks, however, KCPS is fully confident that all bids tested
were awarded to the most qualified vendor at the most advantageous
price.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/1/26
Please provide details of KCPS does agree to revise it’s Purchasing Manual to better reflect the
corrective action or procedures required to document each committee member’s evaluation
explain disagreement. of vendor bids and to ensure the evaluations are consistent with the
criteria established in the IFB.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/1/26
Please provide details of KCPS does agree to maintain detailed support for all information used
corrective action or during the bid evaluation, such as reference checks.
explain disagreement.
Auditor’s Comment: KCPS indicates that the analysis of this finding is not
factually accurate because it is confident that all bids tested were awarded to the
most qualified vendor at the most advantageous price. KCPS was unable to
provide documentation to support this assertion; however, KCPS does agree to
maintain such documentation going forward.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 35 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into KCPS’ written Procurement Procedures and were not
consistently used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPAs).
We recommend that KCPS
a. incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirements and other
identified and acknowledged best practices into its Procurement
Procedures (repeat),
b. ensure that the performance of the requirements and best practices are
documented when evaluating and participating in ICPAs (repeat), and
c. maintain a comprehensive list of all contracts awarded under an ICPA.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide KCPS agrees to review the written Procurement Procedures and make
additional comments as the necessary changes to better incorporate the standard practices in
deemed necessary. regards to ICPAs.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/26
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirements
corrective action or and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
explain disagreement. procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the
requirements and best practices are documented when evaluating and
participating in ICPAs.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/26
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to ensure that the performance of the requirements and best
corrective action or practices are documented when evaluating and participating in ICPAs.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/26
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to maintain a comprehensive list of all contracts awarded
corrective action or under an ICPA
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 36 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
KCPS did not always obtain Board approval, execute written contracts,
prepare written justifications, and publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) for non-competitive procurements.
We recommend that KCPS comply with its Procurement Procedures and
State law when procuring non-competitive contracts including
a. obtaining Board approval;
b. entering into written contracts;
c. preparing written justifications; and
d. publishing contract awards and procurement awards on eMMA as
required, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/25
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to obtain board approval when necessary for all sole source
corrective action or contracts moving forward.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/25
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to enter into written contracts for all sole source contracts
corrective action or moving forward.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/25
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to prepare written justifications for all sole source
corrective action or contracts moving forward.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/25
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to publish contract awards and procurement awards on
corrective action or eMMA moving forward.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 37 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4
KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety.
We recommend that KCPS perform independent supervisory reviews of
changes processed for the bi-weekly payroll, at least on a test basis, by
agreeing changes to appropriate supporting documentation (repeat).
We advised KCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/1/26
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to test the bi-weekly Payroll to ensure accuracy. The
corrective action or Director of Finance can work with the Systems Administrator to review
explain disagreement. reports to review what was entered in the system for Payroll.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 38 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Equipment Control and Accountability
Finding 5
KCPS did not establish adequate accountability and control over its
equipment.
We recommend that KCPS establish adequate controls over its equipment
including maintaining comprehensive records and conducting periodic
physical inventories.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide KCPS does maintain adequate accountability and control over the
additional comments as overwhelming majority of its equipment. There is one area that was
deemed necessary. highlighted during the findings that we will make a correction to moving
forward so we are fully compliant in this category. KCPS does maintain
comprehensive records and conduct periodic physical inventories of its
equipment for the overwhelming majority of its equipment.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/1/26
Please provide details of KCPS has established a plan amongst all departments to review overall
corrective action or inventory. Currently, this is being reconciled by the Systems
explain disagreement. Administrator. Once reconciliation is complete, updated Inventory
information will be added to the system. This is separate from the Fixed
Asset Inventory.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 39 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 6 through 8 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with KCPS’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, KCPS’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 40 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 9
KCPS did not adequately monitor its TPA to verify the propriety of amounts
paid, compliance with performance measures, and the eligibility of enrolled
dependents.
We recommend that KCPS
a. compare its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and contract
rates to determine the propriety of related administrative fees and
monthly subscription fees billed (repeat);
b. obtain documentation to support claim payments and any additional
information on the end of year settlement (repeat);
c. establish a process to independently verify, at least annually, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met; and
d. maintain documentation to support the eligibility of dependents claimed
by enrolled health care program participants.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide Regarding recommendation C. All audits of claim payments were
additional comments as provided by our Consultant. Currently, we are conducting an audit as an
deemed necessary. ESMEC entity to is auditing everything including the performance
guarantees.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/25
Please provide details of Although this is a finding for KCPS, this is a result of the entire ESMEC
corrective action or set up with our consultants. As the vice chair of the ESMEC Health
explain disagreement. Trustee’s I will ask for a trustee meeting where this can be discussed in
greater detail to create a corrective action to better monitor and internally
check the contract rates, administrative fee and monthly subscription
fees.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/25
Please provide details of KCPS agrees to obtain documentation to support claim payments and
corrective action or any additional information on the end of year settlement.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/25
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 41 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of We are currently conducting a claims audit that now includes an audit of
corrective action or performance guarantees.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 9d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediate
Please provide details of KCPS has always verified dependents, but we will now upload
corrective action or documentation into our B-Swift benefits management platform.
explain disagreement.
Auditor’s Comment: Although KCPS indicates that the analysis of this finding
is not factually accurate because audits of claims payments were provided the
,
audits of claims payments did not address annual performance measures or the
accuracy of the TPA’s self-reported penalties.. Nevertheless, KCPS does indicate
that an audit is currently underway that will include performance guarantees.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 42 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Jammie A. Brown
Mia W. Foelster
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Information Systems Staff Auditor