Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Special Investigation Unit Update and Results


Video Presentation (Special Investigation Unit Update and Results starts at 00:57)
Date: 2025-11-19
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=691e15d73e63229ee088e461
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:12:11.180428
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Investigation Unit
Update and Results
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA , CFE
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
November 19, 2025

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Investigation Unit - History
 2002 – The Joint Audit Committee instructed OLA to implement a hotline and
web referral process for the reporting of allegations of fraud, waste, and
abuse in State government operations.
 2003 – OLA’s hotline and web referral process were launched with an
expected call volume of 200 calls per year but as noted on page 7, actual call
volume has consistently exceeded expectations.
 2016 – OLA dedicates a second employee to the hotline.
 2020 – OLA establishes the Fraud Investigation Unit.
 2024 – OLA changes the name to the Special Investigation Unit.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 2
Update and Results

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Investigation Unit (SIU) – Responsibilities
SIU operations include both administrative and investigative activities as
depicted in the following tables.
Administrative Operations Investigative Operations
Fraud Hotline Administration Audit Support
• Call Intake • Allegation Approach Development
• Initial Research, Assessment, & Recommended Actions • Procedural & Testing Guidance
• Allegation Referrals • Finding Development
• Vendor & Employee Research
• Transaction Analyses
Allegation Due Diligence
• Specialized Reports
• Research
• Validity & Risk Assessment
Special Investigations
• Approach Development
• Recommended Actions • Planning & Conducting Investigations
• Referrals to Prosecutorial Agencies
Outreach & Education
Fraud Brainstorming & Risk Assessment
• Agency Outreach
• Training & Development • Brainstorming
• Presentations • Allegation Risk Assessment
• Assessment of High-Risk Areas
Special Investigation Unit
Page 3
Update and Results

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Awareness
The SIU promotes OLA’s hotline by displaying
fraud posters in State offices, posting
information on LinkedIn, distributing
information to vendors on eMaryland
Marketplace, and sending periodic emails
about OLA’s hotline to State employees.
Chapter 225 of the Acts of 2021 required
that each unit of State government:
• Display OLA’s fraud hotline posters in their
buildings,
• Post a link to OLA’s fraud hotline website
on their websites, and
• At the request of OLA, distribute
information regarding fraud to their
employees.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 4
Update and Results

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Administration
 Allegations are received by phone, web, mail, and from OLA auditors in the
field.
 Callers are informed that the information provided is considered
confidential and are provided with information about the State’s
“whistleblower” laws if reassurance is needed.
 OLA auditors assigned to the hotline handle calls during business hours in
accordance with established procedures.
 Investigative auditors (certified fraud examiners) evaluate all allegations,
and due diligence is performed before field investigations are initiated.
 Allegations are: 1) investigated by OLA – either as part of a regularly
scheduled audit or as a special review, 2) referred to applicable State
agencies, or 3) not pursued.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 5
Update and Results

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Administrative Operations - Referrals to State Agencies
Callers who report allegations that would be more appropriately handled by
other agencies are referred to the applicable agencies for assistance.
Examples of these referrals include:
 Welfare Benefits – Department of Human Services, Office of the Inspector
General
 Medicaid Benefits – Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Health
 Identify Theft – Office of the Attorney General, Identify Theft Unit
 Income Tax – Comptroller of Maryland, Compliance Division
 Unemployment Insurance – Maryland Department of Labor
Special Investigation Unit
Page 6
Update and Results

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Statistics
Call Volume Allegation Disposition
(Calendar Year Basis) (February 2003 through September 2025)
1800
1679
1600
1400 1321 Investigations Completed by
12%
1212
OLA or in Process
1200
1072
1000 Referred to State Agencies
69%
800 (30% were related to Department
of Human Services benefits.)
600
473
400
Not Pursued 19%
200
0
Average 2022 2023 2024 2025
2003 to 2021 Actual Actual Actual Projected
Special Investigation Unit
Page 7
Update and Results

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Investigative Operations – Audit Support
The SIU provided support on over 30 audits including:
 The development of audit procedures to address allegations and related risks.
 Preparation of electronic data matches to identify high-risk transactions.
 Analyses of agency transactions and documents to identify indicators of fraud
and noncompliance with laws and regulations.
 Comprehensive research into individuals and companies referenced in
allegations.
 Participation in fraud brainstorming sessions to identify high-risk areas and
develop an approach to address the risks.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 8
Update and Results

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SIU Findings in Special Reviews and Regular Audits
 SIU issued two Special Reviews:
 Office of the Register of Wills Baltimore City (the Office) - Report Dated July
24, 2025.
 State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) – Report Dated
October 6, 2025.
 Results of OLA review of allegations were also included in 8 other reports:
 St. Mary’s College of Maryland  Maryland African American
 Department of Agriculture Museum Corporation
 Maryland Department of Aging  State Highway Administration
 Department of Natural Resources  Department of Public Safety and
 Maryland Insurance Correctional Services
Administration
Special Investigation Unit
Page 9
Update and Results

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Review – Register of Wills Baltimore City
SIU received allegations related to possible violations of State laws, regulations,
and policies including questionable procurement and payroll practices. SIU
identified deficiencies with procedures and controls and certain matters that
were referred to the State Ethics Commission.
Finding 1- The Register of Wills Baltimore City (Office) did not consolidate multiple
procurements from the same vendors, including media and promotional items,
circumventing competitive procurement and approval requirements.
 From January 1, 2017 through October 24, 2024, the Office made 1,749
payments for various office expenses totaling $2.6 million, of which, 1,725
(98.6 percent) totaling $2.3 million were individually valued at $5,000 or less.
 Of the 75 payments we tested, 74 payments totaling $266,000 made to 12
vendors were not consolidated, and certain payments also appeared to be
split. By not consolidating these procurements, the Office was able to select
vendors without competitive procurements and necessary approvals.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 10
Update and Results

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Review – Register of Wills Baltimore City (cont.)
Finding 2 - The Office could not provide documentation to justify $1.1 million
spent on media and promotional items which was significantly higher than other
Registers of Wills (ROWs).
 The Office could not provide documentation that it assessed the need for
these purchases and how the items would enhance residents’ knowledge of
the Office’s mission. For example, $1,500 was spent on 500 manicure sets
printed with “Where there’s a will there’s a way!” which did not include the
name of the Office or any contact information.
 The Office paid $197,000 to produce an informational television show that
never aired.
 While these purchases were not prohibited, amounts spent by the Office on
these items were significantly higher than three similarly sized ROWs.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 11
Update and Results

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Review – Register of Wills Baltimore City (cont.)
Finding 3 - The hiring and ongoing employment of one employee appeared
questionable and potentially violated State ethics law.
 The Office did not have critical documentation to support the hiring of the
employee, which was conducted by the Office management employee
referenced in the allegation. The Office could not readily document how the
position was solicited, and the employee’s personnel file did not contain any of
the standard employment documents, such as employment application,
résumé, and position description.
 The employee founded and operated a company that provided professional
services to the Office management employee who hired the employee.
According to the company’s website, the company continued to provide
services to the management employee subsequent to the employee being
hired by the Office.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 12
Update and Results

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Review – State Department of Assessments and Taxation
SIU received an allegation related to possible violations of State laws,
regulations, and policies including questionable corporate purchasing card (CPC)
purchases. SIU identified certain matters that were referred to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division and procedural deficiencies that require
corrective action by DAT.
Findings 1 and 2 - The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT)
could not document that it investigated questionable CPC charges processed by
one cardholder and did not identify certain questionable transactions.
 SIU identified questionable and unsupported payments (such as payments for
vacation rental properties processed on behalf of two DAT management
employees) that were not identified by DAT. For example, DAT could not
provide documentation for 230 payments totaling $41,400.
 SIU also determined that DAT did not establish comprehensive procedures and
controls over CPC activity.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 13
Update and Results

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Reviews Conducted During Scheduled Audits
Maryland African American Museum Corporation (August 15, 2025)
 Finding 2 – The Maryland African American Museum Corporation (MAAMC) was
notified that a former Special Events employee directed a customer to pay the
employee rather than MAAMC for parking costs. SIU noted that MAAMC did not do a
comprehensive investigation of this matter and did not refer the questionable activity
to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division (CD). SIU identified additional
instances in which customers were instructed to pay the employee rather than
MAAMC which were referred to the CD.
 Finding 3 - MAAMC did not establish sufficient accountability over its Special Events
activities, which contributed to the employee redirecting payments.
 Finding 4 - Our test of MAAMC’s corporate purchasing card transactions during the
audit disclosed certain transactions were not adequately supported. SIU identified 11
questionable payments made by two cardholders totaling $4,215. For example, eight
of the payments totaling $4,050 had questionable supporting documentation, such
as, invoices that misspelled the vendor’s name and two payments made to the
cardholder’s personal PayPal account.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 14
Update and Results

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Reviews Conducted During Scheduled Audits (cont.)
St. Mary’s College of Maryland - Finding 4 (December 18, 2024)
 A St. Mary’s College of Maryland management employee had secondary
employment with a vendor that raised questions about the propriety of the
procurements and related payments and potentially violated State ethics law.
The management employee supervised and participated in discussions related
to the procurement of two contracts awarded to the vendor totaling $187,700.
Senior management personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that
the management employee’s secondary employment and participation in
these transactions could potentially violate State ethics law.
Maryland Department of Agriculture – Finding 2 (March 13, 2025)
 The Maryland Department of Agriculture’s Rural Maryland Council did not
always receive and review grantee reports and did not document approval of
grantee extension requests. For example, 13 grantees with awards totaling
$461,000 had not submitted interim and/or final reports for periods ranging
from 70 to 419 days after the report’s due date.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 15
Update and Results

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Reviews Conducted During Scheduled Audits (Cont.)
Maryland Department of Aging – Finding 3 (April 23, 2025)
 The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) did not obtain support for
payments for grant programs, certain of which appeared questionable. Our
test of 7 payments totaling $1.2 million disclosed that MDOA did not receive
any documentation to support the propriety of the payments. Our review of $1
million awarded to one grantee in June 2022 disclosed that MDOA could not
support how the funds were used, including $600,000 awarded for one
jurisdiction that did not have any grant participants as of April 2024.
Department of Natural Resources – Finding 5 (April 24, 2025)
 The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) did not use available information
to ensure the Comptroller of Maryland (COM) transferred certain required
revenue into the Mel Noland Woodland Incentive Fund. For fiscal years 2020
through 2023, COM did not transfer $430,000 of the $707,000 it should have
under State law. DNR was unaware of the underfunding until we brought the
matter to their attention.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 16
Update and Results

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Reviews Conducted During Scheduled Audits (Cont.)
Maryland Insurance Administration – Finding 6 (May 2, 2025)
 The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) did not promptly cancel
corporate purchasing cards for employees who separated from MIA. Cards
were not cancelled timely for eight cardholders. Six of the cards were cancelled
from 73 to 467 days after the employee separated from MIA, and two of the
cards were still active at the time of our review for employees who had been
separated from MIA for 81 to 173 days.
State Highway Administration – Findings 1 & 2 (September 8, 2025)
 State Highway Administration (SHA) routinely charged expenses to federal fund
projects not authorized by the federal granting agency resulting in $358.7
million as of August 2025 that may need to be funded with Transportation
Trust Funds or State general funds.
 SHA could not support the propriety of accrued federal fund revenue entries
totaling $449 million recorded at the end of fiscal year 2024 or the
subsequent recovery of the funds.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 17
Update and Results

--- Page 18 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other SIU Results
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
OLA referral to Office of the Attorney – Criminal Division contributed to a former
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) employee and a
DPSCS contractor pleading guilty in a fraudulent procurement scheme.
 A former DPSCS employee and DPSCS contractor plead guilty to felony
procurement fraud related to contracts awarded for cleaning, maintenance,
and repair work at certain DPSCS facilities.
 The contractor submitted multiple fraudulent bids on procurements that were
higher than the contractor’s own bids. The DPSCS employee used the fake
bids to recommend awarding contracts to the contractor, which had submitted
lower bids. In exchange for the contracts, the contractor helped the employee
obtain payouts from fraudulent insurance claims on properties owned by the
employee or the employee’s family.
 Since 2012, the contractor received over $375,000 from the State for work at
DPSCS, including $51,200 awarded in the fraudulent bidding scheme.
Special Investigation Unit
Page 18
Update and Results

--- Page 19 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
The SIU’s efforts will continue to evolve and expand to help prevent and detect
fraud and abuse in State government.
 Significant efforts continue to be made to build awareness of the hotline.
 Hotline activity has continued to exceed initial expectations. Hotline staff
provide a high level of customer service to the hundreds of hotline callers.
 OLA continues to identify and report on significant findings, in both fiscal
compliance audit reports and special review reports, based on hotline
allegations.
 SIU future plans include:
 Processes for the proactive detection of fraudulent transactions
 Expanded support for ongoing audit efforts
 Additional initiatives to promote fraud awareness in State government
Special Investigation Unit
Page 19
Update and Results