Title: Review of State Units Exempt from State Procurement Laws and Regulations
Date: 2025-11-20
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=691f623ca70f0168fdee8744
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:11:54.122336
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Review of State Units Exempt from State Procurement
Laws and Regulations
November 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 20, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a special review of units of State government that are exempt
from State procurement laws. This review was initiated because of concerns
identified during recent audits of State agencies with exemptions from State
procurement law, as well as concerns expressed by members of the General
Assembly. State procurement law contains various provisions that exempt
specified units, either in full or in part, from adherence to certain requirements
including regulated procurement methods, public notice of solicitations and
awards and purchasing preferences. These units are not precluded from following
certain State procurement laws and regulations intended to promote the purposes
of State procurement law such as the use of competitive procurements.
The purpose of our review was to (1) identify the units of State government that
are exempt from State procurement law; (2) determine whether exempt units’
written policies addressed the minimum areas required by State law and were
approved by the appropriate oversight entity; and 3) determine whether exempt
units’ procurement policies were consistent with State procurement laws and
regulations. We conducted our review during the period from December 2, 2024
through September 2, 2025 and the results herein are based on information
obtained during this period.
Our review noted that 42 units of State government have an exemption from State
procurement law dating back to calendar year 1983. These units consist of 29
units that are fully exempt and 13 that were exempt for select procurements. Our
review disclosed that 38 of the 42 units have developed written procurement
policies as required.

--- Page 4 ---
Our closer review of 9 of the 38 units with an established policy disclosed
inconsistencies in whether minimum requirements were addressed, if the policy
had been approved, and what was addressed in the procurement policy. For
example, 7 of the 9 units reviewed did not require procurement awards to be
published. The remaining 2 units did not include any timeframe for the
publication of contract awards and did not require the award of all procurement
types to be published.
The results of this review will be considered in subsequent audits conducted by
our office of the units of State government referenced in this report. While this
report does not include formal recommendations, we have included a list of
Statewide improvements to facilitate monitoring exempt procurements for the
Committee’s consideration.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Maryland Procurement Law 4
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 5
Scope 5
Objectives and Methodology 5
Objective 1 – Identify units exempt from State procurement law
and the nature of the exemption.
Objective and Methodology 7
Conclusion 7
Objective 2 – Determine whether exempt units’ written policies
addressed the minimum areas required by State law and were
approved by the appropriate oversight entity.
Objective and Methodology 12
Conclusion 12
Objective 3 - Determine whether exempt units’ procurement
policies were consistent with State procurement laws and
regulations.
Objective and Methodology 13
Conclusion 14
Considerations for Improvement 20
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Maryland Procurement Law
Division II of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland establishes the organization of State procurement, the available
procurement methods (such as competitive bidding), and other rules and
procedures that must be followed throughout the procurement process by units of
State government. The stated purpose of State procurement law is to provide
increased confidence in State procurement; ensure the fair and equitable treatment
of all persons who deal with the State procurement system; provide a procurement
system of quality and integrity; foster effective broad-based competition in the
State through support of the free enterprise system; and promote development of
uniform State procurement procedures to the extent possible.
The Board of Public Works (BPW) is responsible for controlling procurement by
various State units through the direct review and approval of most State contracts
exceeding $200,000 and by promulgating State regulations. Since 1983, the
General Assembly has enacted various legislation granting units partial or full
exemption from Division II for certain policy reasons or because these units
performed specialized functions. State law does not contain a single,
comprehensive list of these exemptions; rather, these exemptions are codified
within Division II or in the respective unit’s enabling statute (see Objective 1).
Generally, an exemption excludes the procurement from BPW review and from
standard State procurement procedures such as regulated procurement methods,
public notice of solicitation and awards, and purchasing from Maryland
Correctional Enterprises, Blind Industries, and Employment Works providers. It
should be noted that certain provisions of State law still apply to exempted units,
such as prohibitions on collusion and the use of suspended and debarred
contractors.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a review of State agencies and other governmental units (units)
granted an exemption from the requirements of State procurement laws and
regulations. This review was initiated because of concerns identified during
recent audits of State agencies with exemptions from State procurement law (as
further described below), as well as concerns expressed by members of the
General Assembly.
Our current review was conducted during the period from December 2, 2024
through September 2, 2025 and the results herein reflect information we were able
to obtain during this period. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the objectives.
These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS). Had we conducted
an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would require the issuance
of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In addition, other matters
may have come to our attention that would have been reported.
Objectives and Methodology
Our review included the following three objectives:
1. Identify units exempt from State procurement law and the nature of the
exemption.
2. Determine whether the exempt units’ written policies addressed the
minimum areas required by State law and were approved by the
appropriate oversight entity.
3. Determine whether exempt units’ procurement policies were consistent
with State procurement laws and regulations.
Our review consisted of analyzing State law and the procurement policies for
certain units of State government granted procurement exemptions (based on our
assessment of risk and materiality). The review was focused on ascertaining if the
procurement policies were established as required and, on a limited basis, whether
the policies complied with State law. Our interaction with these units was limited
5

--- Page 8 ---
to obtaining the respective policies. We did not attempt to determine why policies
were not established or did not adhere to State law.
In addition, because exempt units are not precluded from following State
procurement laws and regulations intended to promote the aforementioned
purposes of State procurement law, on a limited basis, we also evaluated whether
exempt units’ policies were consistent with significant areas of State procurement
laws and regulations applicable to non-exempt units of State government. As
needed, we contacted the units to obtain their written policies and procedures and
other documentation or information necessary for our review.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Objective 1
Identify units exempt from State procurement laws and the
nature of the exemption.
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to identify the units that have an exemption from State
procurement law and the nature of the exemption. There is no single source
listing units with procurement exemptions. In addition, State accounting records
are not set up to readily identify procurements processed under an exemption.
Accordingly, we reviewed the Annotated Code of Maryland to identify units that
were exempt from some or all of the State procurement laws included in Division
II of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland (Division II).
Our review focused on Executive Branch State agencies, State universities, and
other governmental units. To complete this objective, we reviewed the
exemptions provided to units under Division II and other areas of State law
referenced in Division II. We also reviewed other articles of the Annotated Code
of Maryland to identify units whose exemptions were granted by the unit’s
enabling statute (rather than the State Finance and Procurement Article).
Conclusion
Our review identified 42 units as having an exemption from State Procurement
Law, dating back to calendar year 1983, including 29 units that were exempt from
State Procurement Laws for all procurements and 13 that were exempt for select
procurements as further described in Figures 1 and 2.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
Units Exempt from State Procurement Law
Year Current
No. Unit
Est. Exempting Statute
Units Exempt from State Procurement Laws for All procurements
1 Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB) 2021 ED, § 5-402
2 Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority (CPPDA) 1993 FI, §13-1027
3 Maryland African American Museum Corporation (MAAMC) 1998 SG, § 9-2612
4 Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF)1 2013 IN, § 20-201
5 Maryland Corps Program (MCP)2 2022 SFP, § 11-203
6 Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO) 1984 EC, § 10-111
7 Maryland Environmental Service (MES) 1993 NR, § 3-103
8 Maryland Food Center Authority (MFCA) 1983 SFP, § 11-203
9 Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) 2011 IN, § 31-103
10 Maryland Rural Council (MRC)2 1995 SFP, § 11-203
11 Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) 1987 SFP, § 11-203
12 Maryland Technology Development Corporation (MTDC) 1998 EC, § 10-407
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority
13 2023 SFP, § 11-203
(MTROA)3
14 West North Avenue Development Authority (WNADA) 2023 SFP, § 11-203
15 University System of Maryland (USM) 1999 SFP, § 11-203
16-27 University System of Maryland (12 Institutions) 1999 SFP, § 11-203
2004 ED, § 14-109
28 Morgan State University (MSU)
2004 SFP, § 11-203
2006 SFP, § 11-203
29 St. Mary's College (SMC)
2007 ED, § 14-405
Units Exempt from Certain State Procurement Laws from Certain Procurements
1 Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) 2003 SFP, § 11-203
2 Department of General Services (DGS) 2009 SFP, § 11-203
3 Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 2010 SFP, § 11-203
4 Department of Commerce (DOC) 1993 SFP, § 11-203
5 Maryland State Arts Council (MSAC)2 1984 SFP, § 11-203
6 Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) 2003 SFP, § 11-203
7 Maryland Historical Trust (MHT)2 1986 SFP, § 11-203
8 Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) 1986 SFP, § 11-203
9 Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) 2019 SPP, § 35-302
10 Prescription Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) 2019 HG, § 21-2c-03
1 MAIF was subject to audit by our office until October 1, 2013 in accordance with Chapter 73,
2013 Laws of Maryland.
2 These units are subject to audit by our office either individually or as part of another regularly
scheduled audit. In this regard, the MCP, MRC, MSAC, and MHT are subject to audit as part of
the Department of Service and Civic Innovation, Department of Agriculture, Department of
Commerce, and Department of Planning audits, respectively, conducted by our office.
3 MTROA was dissolved effective June 30, 2025, in accordance with the 2025 Maryland Budget
Reconciliation and Financing Act which designated MEDCO and MSA as its successors.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Year Current
No. Unit
Est. Exempting Statute
11 Maryland State Archives (SA) 2017 SFP, § 11-203
12 Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) 1997 SFP, § 11-203
13 State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) 1986 SFP, § 11-203
EC: Economic Development Article IN: Insurance Article
ED: Education Article NR: Natural Resources Article
FI: Financial Institutions Article SG: State Government Article
HG: Health General Article SPP: State Personnel and Pensions Article
As noted above, 13 entities are only exempt from Division II for specific types of
procurements as described in Figure 2.
Figure 2
Units with Specified Procurements Exempt from Division II
No. Unit Types of Procurements Exempt
For family and individual support services, and individual family care services, as those
1 DDA
terms are defined by the Maryland Department of Health in regulation.
For the rehabilitation of a structure listed or eligible for listing in the National Register of
2 DGS Historic Places, to the extent the procurement is necessary to preserve the historic fabric
of the structure impacted by the rehabilitation.
For grants, agreements, or partnerships with nonprofit entities related to conservation
3 DNR
service opportunities and for pay-for-success contracts as defined in State law.
For private section cooperative marketing projects that directly enhance promotion of
Maryland and the tourism industry where there will be a private sector contribution to the
4 DOC project of not less than 50 percent of the total cost of the project.
For training services or programs related to the Maryland Industrial Training Program and
the Partnership for Workforce Quality Program.
5 MSAC For the support of the arts.
For grants and cooperative agreements with private entities to meet federal specifications
6 MEA or solicitation requirements related to energy conservation, energy efficiency, or
renewable energy projects that benefit the State.
For surveying and evaluating architecturally, archeologically, historically, or culturally
7 MHT significant properties, and for preparing historic preservation planning documents and
educational material.
For services of artists for educational and cultural television productions or when planning
8 MPBC for or fulfilling the obligations of grants or cooperative agreements that support the
educational and cultural activities of the Commission.
For services and expenditures related to the administration and maintenance of the
9 MSRP
Supplemental Retirement Plans.
10 PDAB For services to be performed or supplies to be delivered to the Board.
9

--- Page 12 ---
No. Unit Types of Procurements Exempt
For the preservation, conservation, care, restoration, and transportation of fine or
11 SA decorative art in the custody of the Commission of Artistic Property and owned by or
loaned to the State.
12 SLGCA For private sector cooperative marketing projects under specific conditions.
For services and expenditures related to the administration and maintenance of the State
13 SRPS
Retirement and Pension System.
Source: Maryland Annotated Code
According to State accounting records, fiscal year 2024 non-payroll operating
expenditures for these 42 units totaled $8.5 billion. We could not readily
determine the number and dollar amount of each unit’s exempt procurements or
the extent that expenditures related to an exempt procurement. For example, the
expenditures reflected in Figure 3 for DDA include all non-payroll operating
expenditures rather than the DDA services that are specifically exempt from State
procurement regulations.
Figure 3
Fiscal Year 2024 Non-Payroll Operating Expenditures
For Agencies Exempt from Procurement Law
($ in millions)
DGS
Others
$438.8
$972.8
5%
11%
MSA
$539.6 Public Institutions of
6% Higher Education
$3,060
36%
DNR
$562.7
7%
DDA
$2,339
MHBE
28%
$589.5
7%
Source: State accounting records
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recent audits performed by our office for MAAMC, MFCA, University of
Maryland Global Campus (UMGC), Frostburg State University (FSU), MSU,
DNR, and MPBC identified findings related to the units’ procurements, including
procurements exempt from Division II.
• MAAMC did not always comply with its written procurement policy
regarding obtaining written proposals and obtaining management
approvals.
• MFCA’s current procurement policies and procedures were not approved
by its Board of Directors as required by State law, and did not require
Board approval of significant procurements to enhance oversight and
control.
• UMGC’s activities raise questions as to whether its continued relationship
with Ventures and its affiliates is in the best interest of UMGC. In this
regard, UMGC obtained services from Ventures and its affiliates totaling
approximately $184.1 million without competitive procurement or
verifying the amounts paid were proper. In addition, UMGC did not
adequately justify two sole source procurements of advertising services
and did not consolidate the procurements which we believe circumvented
USM Procurement Policies and Procedures.
• FSU did not exercise adequate due diligence or comply with certain
procurement policies when it procured a new financial aid system. In
addition, FSU did not competitively procure student mental health services
initially obtained without competition in October 2019 through an
emergency procurement, and then extended multiple years using
questionable sole source justifications and without obtaining required
approvals. FSU also did not verify that its use of contracts procured by
other entities was in the best interest of FSU as required by Board of
Regents procurement policies and procedures.
• MSU did not procure certain goods and services in accordance with its
policies and procedures.
• DNR did not always comply with State procurement regulations including
documenting bid openings, retaining proposals, executing contracts, and
publishing contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM).
• MPBC continued to use the services of a vendor for several years after the
related contract had expired. In addition, MPBC did not always comply
11

--- Page 14 ---
with State procurement regulations for its non-exempt procurements and
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements including
documenting bid openings and publishing contract awards on eMMA.
Objective 2
Determine whether exempt units’ written policies addressed the
minimum areas required by State law and were approved by the
appropriate oversight entity.
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to first determine if all 42 exempt units had written policies as
required. We then determined if the policies maintained by certain units
addressed the minimum areas required by State law and were approved by the
appropriate oversight entity. Specifically, we judgmentally selected the following
9 units based primarily on the materiality of their operating expenditures.
1. MHBE 4. MEDCO 7. MFCA
2. MSA 5. MES 8. MAAMC
3. DGS 6. MPBC 9. USM
Section 12-401 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland requires each exempt unit (excluding colleges and universities)
to establish policies that address the following areas: (1) the procurement method
to be used; (2) the advertising requirements; (3) procurement goals, including
minority business enterprise participation; and (4) the approval process for each
type of procurement exempted.
Although USM and its institutions are not required to comply with Section 12-
401, the Education Article requires colleges and universities to establish policies
and procedures that promote the purposes of Division II of the State Finance and
Procurement Article. The Article also requires colleges and universities to submit
these policies to the Board of Public Works (BPW) but does not identify specific
areas that must be addressed. Therefore, for the purpose of our review, we
included USM to assess whether its policy addressed the areas identified in
Section 12-401.
Conclusion
Our review disclosed that 4 of the 42 exempt units did not have written policies as
required by State law. Specifically, the State Lottery and Gaming Control
Agency, the Maryland Corps Program, the Maryland State Archives, and the
12

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland Energy Administration did not have a written procurement policy as of
March 2025.
In addition, for the 9 units selected for further review we determined that 2 units
did not include some of the required elements in their policy and another did not
have its policy approved as required. Specifically, as of March 2025, MFCA’s
procurement policy did not include advertising requirements4, MAAMC’s
procurement policy did not include advertising requirements or procurement goals
including minority business enterprise (MBE) goals, and MES’s procurement
policy (dated October 2021) had not been approved by its Board of Directors. We
did not attempt to determine why MFCA and MAAMC’s policies did not address
advertising requirements and/or procurement goals.
Objective 3
Determine whether exempt units’ procurement policies were
consistent with State procurement laws and regulations.
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine whether exempt units’ procurement policies were
consistent with State procurement laws and regulations governing non-exempt
units. These statewide laws and regulations provide comprehensive controls to
ensure the integrity and transparency of the procurement process. While exempt
units do not have to follow these statewide requirements, to the extent possible,
their policies should incorporate key areas of these requirements to enhance the
integrity and transparency of their procurements. To that end, for the units
selected in Objective 2, we reviewed whether the policies addressed the following
critical areas and if the policy was consistent with State laws and regulations
applicable to non-exempt units:
1. Competitive procurements
A. Does the policy address the use of competitive procurements?
B. Does the policy address the use of written solicitations?
C. Does the policy address the opening and security of bids and proposals?
D. Does the policy address the basis for award?
E. Does the policy address approval requirements?
2. Sole source procurements
A. Does the policy address the use of sole source procurements?
4 Subsequent to our recommendation resulting from the above noted audit report, MFCA obtained
Board approval for its procurement policy.
13

--- Page 16 ---
B. Does the policy require written sole source justifications?
C. Does the policy require the unit to negotiate sole source procurements?
D. Does the policy address approval requirements?
3. Intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA)
A. Does the policy address the use of ICPA procurements?
B. Does the policy require the unit to document the justification for use of the
ICPA procurement method, consistent with the requirements of State law?
C. Does the policy address approval requirements for ICPA procurements?
4. Public notice of solicitation and award
A. Does the policy require the public solicitation of contracts?
B. Does the policy require the publication of contract awards?
5. Use of minority business enterprises (MBE)
A. Does the policy address MBE participation goals?
B. Does the policy require an appropriate MBE participation goal to be set
for each procurement?
For the units whose policies addressed these areas, we assessed whether the
policies deviated from the criteria in State law and regulations applicable to non-
exempt units. Our analysis was limited to the review of these units’ policies, and
did not include discussion with the units’ management or testing of exempt
procurements to assess the actual application of the policies.
Conclusion
Policy Area 1
Competitive Procurement
State Procurement Requirements for Competitive Procurements
Unit
A B C D E
MHBE Yes Yes Not Consistent Yes Yes
MSA Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DGS Not Consistent Yes Not Addressed Yes Yes
MEDCO Not Consistent Not Consistent Not Addressed Not Consistent Not Consistent
MES Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
MPBC Yes Not Consistent Not Addressed Not Consistent Not Consistent
MFCA Yes Not Consistent Not Addressed Yes Not Consistent
MAAMC Yes Not Consistent Not Addressed Not Addressed Yes
USM Yes Not Consistent Yes Yes Not Consistent
Not Addressed: 0 0 5 1 0
Not Consistent: 2 5 1 2 4
14

--- Page 17 ---
A. Does the policy address the use of competitive procurements?
Our review disclosed that all units’ policies addressed the use of competitive
procurements. However, two units’ policies were not consistent with State
procurement regulations. Specifically, the DGS policy stated direct solicitation
would be used in its procurements but did not specify the number of vendors to be
solicited. Similarly, the MEDCO policy did not state a preference for competition
for all procurements such as services or supplies procured.
B. Does the policy address the use of written solicitations?
Our review disclosed that five units’ policies were not consistent with State
procurement regulations because they did not require written solicitations for all
competitive procurements over $50,000. For example, USM’s procurement
policy required written solicitations for procurements above $200,000 (four times
the amount for non-exempt units).
C. Does the policy address the opening and security of bids and proposals?
Our review disclosed that five units’ policies did not address bid or proposal
opening and security. In addition, MHBE’s policy addressed the opening and
security of competitive sealed bids but did not include similar requirements for
competitive sealed proposals. State requirements generally require competitive
sealed bids to remain sealed until opened publicly and competitive sealed
proposals shall not be opened publicly. For competitive bids and proposals, the
offeror’s name may not be disclosed publicly.
D. Does the policy address the basis for award?
Our review disclosed that MAAMC’s policy did not address the basis for award
for competitive procurements. In addition, MEDCO’s and MPBC’s policies
addressed the award of competitive procurements but did not specify that the
contract should be awarded to the lowest bidder or most advantageous to the
State. For example, MPBC’s policy provides that its evaluation committee
recommends the vendor for contract award but does not indicate the criteria to be
considered in this recommendation. State requirements provide that contracts
should be awarded to the responsible offeror with the bid or proposal that was
determined to be the lowest price or the most advantageous to the State.
15

--- Page 18 ---
E. Does the policy address approval requirements for competitive
procurements?
Our review disclosed the dollar threshold established by four units’ policies
significantly exceeded the amount specified in State procurement regulations,
which generally require approval from BPW for procurements above $200,000.
For example, MPBC’s policy only required its Commission’s approval for
contracts of $1 million or more.
Policy Area 2
Sole Source Procurement
State Procurement Requirements for Sole Source
Unit Procurements
A B C D
MHBE Yes Yes Yes Yes
MSA Yes Yes Not Addressed Yes
Not Not
DGS Not Addressed Not Addressed
Addressed Addressed
Not Not
MEDCO Not Addressed Not Consistent
Addressed Addressed
MES Yes Yes Yes Not Consistent
MPBC Yes Yes Not Addressed Not Consistent
MFCA Yes Yes Not Addressed Not Consistent
Yes Not
MAAMC Not Addressed Yes
Addressed
USM Yes Yes Yes Not Consistent
Not Addressed: 2 3 6 1
Not Consistent: 0 0 0 5
A. Does the policy address the use of sole source procurements?
Our review disclosed that two units’ policies did not address the use of sole
source procurements.
B. Does the policy require written sole source justifications?
Our review disclosed that three units’ policies did not require a written
justification for sole source procurements. State requirements require a written
determination that there is only one available source for the subject of the
procurement.
16

--- Page 19 ---
C. Does the policy require the unit to negotiate sole source procurements?
Our review disclosed that six units’ policies did not require the unit to negotiate
the price and other terms of sole source procurements. State regulations generally
require the procurement officer to negotiate price and other terms, as appropriate.
D. Does the policy address approval requirements for sole source
procurements?
Our review disclosed that one unit’s policy did not address sole source
procurement approvals. In addition, the threshold in the policy for five other units
exceeded the amount established in State procurement regulations ($100,000) or
did not require approval of its oversight entity. For example, under MFCA’s
policy, only procurements exceeding $500,000 require approval by its Board.
Policy Area 3
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements (ICPA)
State Procurement Requirement for ICPAs
Unit
A B C
MHBE Yes Not Addressed Yes
MSA Not Addressed Not Addressed Not Addressed
DGS Not Addressed Not Addressed Not Addressed
MEDCO Not Addressed Not Addressed Not Addressed
MES Yes Not Addressed Yes
MPBC Not Addressed Not Addressed Not Addressed
MFCA Yes Yes Not Consistent
MAAMC Not Addressed Not Addressed Not Addressed
USM Yes Not Addressed Not Consistent
Not Addressed: 5 8 5
Not Consistent: 0 0 2
A. Does the policy address the use of ICPA procurements?
Our review disclosed that five units’ policies did not address ICPA procurements.
B. Does the policy require the unit to document the justification for use of
the ICPA procurement method, consistent with the requirements of State
law?
Our review disclosed that eight units’ policies do not require the unit to document
justification for the use of an ICPA. State law requires units that use the ICPA
17

--- Page 20 ---
procurement method to make a determination in writing that includes sufficient
evidence the ICPA will provide cost benefits or promote administrative
efficiencies. The unit must also include a statement the ICPA is in the best
interest of the State and not intended to evade the purposes of Division II of the
State Finance and Procurement Article.
C. Does the policy address approval requirements for ICPA procurements?
As noted above, five units’ policies do not address ICPA procurements. Our
review disclosed that two units’ policies established procurement approvals;
however, the dollar threshold for approval was not consistent with State
procurement requirements. For example, only MFCA procurements of $500,000
or more require the approval of its Board of Directors. For non-exempt units,
ICPA procurements above $200,000 generally require the approval of BPW.
Policy Area 4
Public Notice of Solicitation and Award
State Procurement Requirement for Publication
Unit
A B
MHBE Yes Not Addressed
MSA Not Consistent Not Addressed
DGS Not Consistent Not Addressed
MEDCO Not Consistent Not Addressed
MES Not Consistent Not Consistent
MPBC Not Consistent Not Addressed
MFCA Not Addressed Not Addressed
MAAMC Not Addressed Not Addressed
USM Not Consistent Not Consistent
Not Addressed: 2 7
Not Consistent: 6 2
A. Does the policy require the public solicitation of contracts?
Our review disclosed that two unit’s policies do not address the public solicitation
of competitive procurements. In addition, five units’ policies either did not
specify a minimum timeframe for advertisement or, in the case of MES, only
required the advertisement for 10 days. We also noted three units’ policies either
did not require public solicitation, did not require it for all competitive
procurements, or did not require it for competitive procurements under a certain
amount. For example, USM did not require public solicitation of competitive
18

--- Page 21 ---
procurements under $200,000. State regulations require advertisement for a
minimum of 20 days for all procurements expected to exceed $50,000.
B. Does the policy require the publication of contract awards?
Our review disclosed that seven units’ policies do not address the publication of
contract awards. In addition, although USM and MES’s policies required the
publication of awards, the policies did not establish a timeframe and did not
require all procurements to be published. For example, MES’s policy did not
address the publication of awards using the competitive sealed proposal
procurement method. State procurement regulations require the publication of
awards within 30 days of when the contract was awarded.
Policy Area 5
Minority Business Enterprise (MBE)
State Procurement Requirements for MBE
Unit A B
MHBE Not Consistent Not Addressed
MSA Yes Yes
DGS Not Consistent Yes
MEDCO Not Consistent Not Addressed
MES Yes Yes
MPBC Not Consistent Not Addressed
MFCA Yes Yes
MAAMC Not Addressed Not Addressed
USM Yes Yes
Not Addressed: 1 4
Not Consistent: 4 0
A. Does the policy address MBE participation goals?
Our review disclosed that MAAMC’s policies did not address MBE participation
goals. In addition, while MHBE, DGS, MEDCO, and MPBC’s policies included
MBE as a procurement goal, achievement of an overall procurement goal was not
acknowledged.
B. Does the policy require an appropriate minority business enterprise
participation goal to be set for each procurement?
Our review disclosed that four unit’s policies did not require the unit to evaluate
each procurement for MBE participation goals.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Considerations for Improvement
Based on the above conclusions, the following improvements could be made to
address the deficiencies identified.
• Consider assigning one agency/entity (such as the Board of Public Works)
authority and responsibility for ensuring exempt agencies/procurements are
governed by sufficient policies and procedures and to periodically reevaluate
the need for the exemptions.
• Consider consolidating the exempt agencies/procurements in one statute to
enable more effective monitoring of the exemptions.
• Consider a review of existing exemptions to determine whether they are
necessary or can be better restricted or defined.
• Consider mandating certain requirements for exempt procurements, such as
publication of solicitation and awards, approvals for transactions over a
certain dollar amount, and inclusion of standard contract language such as
liquidated damages.
• Consider statute prohibiting exempt agencies from using the exemption to
procure goods and services on behalf of non-exempt agencies.
• Consider qualifying the exemptions to indicate that they are to follow State
procurement laws and regulations unless there is a documented reason not to
for the specific procurement. For example, University System of Maryland
institutions could comply with State procurement regulations for purchases of
computers but may be exempt when procuring education related goods and
services.
• Consider establishing a mechanism to quantify and report exempt
procurement activity.
20