Title: Department of Budget and Management - Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Date: 2025-12-09
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=693b46e1a76060e89f512a57
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:11:32.487526
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
December 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 9, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) for the
period beginning November 1, 2021 and ending February 28, 2025. OPSB
develops the State’s personnel policies for Executive Branch State agencies
subject to the State Personnel Management System (SPMS), administers the
health care benefit programs for State employees and retirees, and has other
responsibilities, including salary administration and classification, recruitment
and examination, and employee relations. OPSB also provides centralized
support to agencies for the State’s Statewide Personnel System (SPS).
Our audit disclosed that OPSB did not have effective procedures to ensure the
propriety of employee benefits. Specifically, OPSB did not identify and remove
coverage for plan participants that did not pay their premiums resulting in subsidy
payments and claim reimbursements for plan participants with unpaid premiums.
We identified 7,574 participants that had unpaid premiums totaling approximately
$5 million in calendar year 2024. As of January 2025, OPSB continued to make
subsidy payments and pay medical claims for 5,800 of these participants with
unpaid premiums totaling $4.1 million. OPSB also did not ensure that audits of
benefit plans were completed timely and did not pursue recovery of improper
amounts identified, a condition noted but not corrected from our prior audit.
Our audit also disclosed that OPSB did not ensure agencies took sufficient action
to address employees who did not complete a timesheet, did not follow up when it
identified employees on the payroll after separating from State employment, and
did not monitor and address significant overtime usage. We identified numerous
employees that did not complete timesheets and 915 employees who remained on
the payroll after they separated from the State including 23 employees at seven

--- Page 4 ---
agencies who received approximately $135,100 after their separation. We also
identified 775 employees whose overtime earnings consistently exceeded their
regular base salary. These conditions were noted but not sufficiently corrected
from our prior report.
Our audit also noted that OPSB did not include sufficient details in its contracts
with plan administrators to specify the calculation of administrative fees. As a
result, OPSB made payments to the plan administrators that were between $3.3
million and $6.6 million more than may have been required.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations
DBM’s response to this audit, on behalf of OPSB, is included as an appendix to
this report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of DBM’s
response related to the cybersecurity audit findings. In accordance with State law,
we have reviewed the response and, while DBM generally agrees with the
recommendations in this report, we identified certain instances in which
statements in the response disagree or appear to be inconsistent with a report
finding and recommendation. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our
audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance
with generally accepted auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s
comments” within DBM’s response to explain our position. We will advise the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot
resolve with DBM.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
OPSB and its agreement to implement the audit recommendations.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Statewide Personnel System (SPS) 9
Health Care Benefits Administration 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 12
Employee Benefit Programs
Finding 1 – The Department of Budget and Management – Office of 12
Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) did not have effective
procedures to identify and remove coverage for plan participants
that did not pay their premiums. We noted that OPSB continued to
make subsidy payments and claims reimbursements on behalf of
plan participants with unpaid premiums.
* Finding 2 – OPSB did not complete required claims eligibility audits or 14
pursue recovery of all improper payments identified in a timely manner.
Finding 3 – Contract audits of the pharmacy benefit manager were not 15
completed in a timely manner.
State Personnel Management System (SPMS) Agency Payroll
* Finding 4 – OPSB did not ensure that SPMS agencies resolved instances 16
when an employee did not complete a timesheet even though SPS
reports identified these discrepancies.
* Finding 5 – OPSB did not follow up when it identified employees who 18
were not removed from the payroll timely to ensure the agencies
recovered any amounts improperly paid.
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
* Finding 6 – OPSB did not have a comprehensive process to monitor and 21
provide guidance to address employees with significant overtime
including 775 employees we identified whose overtime earnings
consistently exceeded their regular base salary.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Healthcare Plan Administrator Contracts
Finding 7 – OPSB’s contracts with two plan administrators did not 24
specify the consumer price index to be used to calculate administrative
fees resulting in OPSB paying between $3.3 million and $6.6 million
more in administrative fees over the term of the contracts.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 25
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 25
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 26
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits (OPSB) directs the development of personnel policies for
Executive Branch State agencies subject to the State Personnel Management
System (SPMS). OPSB also performs a variety of other functions for these
agencies, including salary administration and classification, recruitment and
examination, employee relations, and providing centralized support for the State’s
Statewide Personnel System (SPS). According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2024, OPSB’s operating expenditures totaled approximately $45
million, which consisted of $14 million in general fund expenditures, $11.5
million in special fund, and $19.5 million in reimbursable fund expenditures (see
Figure 1).
Certain executive branch agencies (primarily the Maryland Department of
Transportation and the University System of Maryland) and the judicial and
legislative branches of State government maintain their own personnel systems
and related policies, are not subject to SPMS, and for the most part do not use
SPS. OPSB also administers the health care benefits programs for all State
employees and retirees, and the flexible spending accounts for all State employees
regardless of which personnel system they are in.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
OPSB Positions, Expenditures, and
Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 132
Vacant 2
Total 134
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $19,131,393
Technical and Special Fees 204,166
Operating Expenses 25,676,982
Total $45,012,541
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $14,052,329
Special Fund 11,458,443
Reimbursable Fund 19,501,769
Total $45,012,541
Source: State financial and personnel records
8

--- Page 11 ---
Statewide Personnel System
SPS provides a comprehensive human resource and payroll system through the
use of a commercial off-the-shelf software platform configured for the State by a
contractor. SPS is a cloud-based application hosted and operated by a third-party
service provider; and is used by SPMS agencies to record personnel transactions,
such as appointments, promotions, certain salary adjustments, and for the
recordation and maintenance of time and leave transactions and records. SPS is
used by all State agencies for purposes of health benefits.
Health Care Benefits Administration
The State makes health care benefits available for all of its employees and retirees
(including their spouses and dependents). OPSB contracts with vendors to
provide and/or manage healthcare, dental and prescription drug coverage. The
State also provides for a Health Care Flexible Spending Account program and
Employee Assistance Program.1 In total, these benefits are provided through 13
plans or programs, which are administered (including claims processing) by 8
contracted plan administrators.2
 Healthcare (medical and mental health) coverage is provided through three
major insurance providers that administer preferred provider organization
(PPO), exclusive provider organization (EPO), point-of-service (POS), and
integrated health model (IHM) plans. The current contracts, which include
the original six-year contract term, 2 two-year renewal options, and a one-year
renewal modification, cover the period from January 1, 2015 to December 31,
2026.
 Dental coverage is provided through two plans offered by two separate
providers that administer a preferred provider organization (DPPO) and a
health maintenance organization (DHMO). The current dental plan contracts,
which include the original five-year contract term, a one-year extension
modification, and a two-year extension modification, are in effect from
January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2027. There are no renewal options.
1 The Employee Assistance Program is a confidential service offered to help State employees who
face personal matters that adversely affect job performance.
2 The procurement of these contracts for periods after their current expiration dates will be subject
to review during future audits of DBM – Office of the Secretary.
9

--- Page 12 ---
 Prescription drug coverage is provided through a pharmacy benefit manager
(PBM). The current contract, a three-year term, is in effect from January 1,
2025 to December 31, 2027 after which there are 2 two-year renewal options.
The State directly pays claims for the PPO, EPO, prescription drug plan, and
DPPO plans. It self-funds these plans and accepts the risk for all costs associated
with these plans; the premiums are held in a dedicated State Employees and
Retirees Health and Welfare Benefits Fund to pay for claims and other authorized
expenses. For the IHM and DHMO plans, the State pays an insurance premium to
the provider and the provider accepts the risk associated with the benefits. The
costs for annual health care benefits have increased from approximately $1.95
billion for fiscal year 2021 to $2.35 billion for fiscal year 2024. Health care
enrollment and costs paid in fiscal year 2024 for plan participants, which include
State employees, retirees, spouses, dependent children, direct pay participants,
and satellite agency participants (such as covered employees of local
governments) are summarized in Figure 2.
Figure 2
Plan Participants in the State of Ma ryland’s Health Benefits Programs
and the Related Costs for Fiscal Year 2024
Enrollment
(as of Dollar Claims Administrative Premiums Total
Plan Type
January 1, Paid Expenses Paid Paid Payments
2024)
PPO 57,103 $ 533,973,203 $25,896,730 N/A $ 559,869,933
EPO 65,448 694,159,286 29,595,874 N/A 723,755,160
IHM 3,609 N/A N/A $35,431,723 35,431,723
POS
(Note 1) 196 2,108,279 107,465 N/A 2,215,744
Prescription
114,516 947,697,141 10,149,597 N/A 957,846,738
Drug
DPPO 104,453 59,901,135 1,881,138 N/A 61,782,273
DHMO 15,866 N/A N/A 5,152,398 5,152,398
Totals $2,237,839,044 $67,630,804 $40,584,121 $2,346,053,969
N/A – not applicable.
Note 1 – POS plan was available only to members of the State Law Enforcement Officers Labor Alliance bargaining unit.
Source: OPSB records
10

--- Page 13 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 20, 2023. See Figure 3 for the results
of our review.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) did not
attempt to recover approximately $1.2 million in liquidated
Finding 1 Not repeated
damages and invalid claim payments identified during certain
2017 and 2018 audits.
Repeated
Audits of benefit program plans and claims eligibility were not
Finding 2 (current Finding
completed in a timely manner.
2)
(Policy Issue) OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to
monitor and ensure that SPMS agencies addressed all outstanding Repeated
Finding 3 payroll discrepancies. Our review disclosed that agencies were (current Finding
not correcting discrepancies, which resulted in potentially 4)
improper payments going undetected.
OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to identify
employees who were terminated or left State service, and were Repeated
Finding 4 not removed from the payroll timely. Our review disclosed that (current Finding
agencies were not removing these employees timely and 5)
payments were made after those employees left State service.
(Policy Issue) OPSB did not have a comprehensive process in
place to formally monitor or periodically evaluate SPMS agency
overtime, and did not have guidance for agencies to manage
Repeated
overtime usage, and justify or prepare a plan to address actions to
Finding 5 (current Finding
minimize or limit excessive overtime levels. We identified high
6)
overtime levels at several agencies, including 549 employees
whose overtime earnings consistently exceeded their regular base
salary.
OPSB did not ensure that employees terminated with prejudice
Finding 6 were properly recorded in the State database and were not rehired Not repeated
by SPMS agencies.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Employee Benefit Programs
Background
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits (OPSB) is responsible for collecting premiums from
individuals participating in benefit programs and for making payments to the plan
administrators for preferred provider organization (PPO), exclusive provider
organization (EPO), prescription drug, and dental preferred provider organization
(DPPO) plan claims. According to OPSB records, as of January 2024, there were
137,600 current or former employees receiving benefits including approximately
130,200 that had premiums automatically deducted from their pay (or were billed
when their salary was not sufficient to cover the premium) and 7,400 that made
direct premium payments (such as contractual employees).
Additionally, the State, as facilitated by OPSB, contributes a certain amount for
each participant to subsidize the premium and to fund the claims paid on their
behalf. Permanent employees and eligible contractual employees receive
premium subsidies for their medical and prescription drug coverage. These
subsidy payments range from 50 percent to 85 percent of the total cost and the
employee is responsible for the remaining 15 percent to 50 percent. Eligibility for
this subsidy depends on employment status, with permanent employees and
certain contractual employees working 30 or more hours per week being eligible.
In fiscal year 2024, subsidy payments totaled $1.5 billion.
Finding 1
OPSB did not have effective procedures to identify and remove coverage for
plan participants that did not pay their premiums. We noted that OPSB
continued to make subsidy payments and claims reimbursements on behalf
of plan participants with unpaid premiums.
Analysis
OPSB did not have effective procedures to identify and remove coverage for plan
participants that did not pay their premiums.
• OPSB did not maintain comprehensive records of outstanding premiums or
invoice participants with delinquent premiums to recover the total amounts
due. Rather, OPSB relied on the claims eligibility audits, which are only
performed annually, to identify individuals with delinquent premiums. In
addition, even when delinquent premiums were identified in the audits, OPSB
12

--- Page 15 ---
did not attempt to recover the total amount due. For example, OPSB only
recovered the lower of the premiums due or claims paid on behalf of the
participant. Subsequent to the audit fieldwork, we were notified by OPSB that
monthly invoices for delinquent premiums are sent to participants, however
documentation was not provided to support this assertion.
• OPSB did not remove coverage for plan participants delinquent in their
premium payments and continued to make subsidy payments and paid medical
claims for these participants. Our analysis of OPSB records for calendar year
2024 identified 7,574 participants, including current employees, retirees, and
individuals on COBRA, that had unpaid premiums totaling approximately $5
million. As of January 2025, OPSB continued to make subsidy payments and
pay medical claims for 5,825 of these participants with unpaid premiums
totaling $4.1 million.
Our test of 10 of these participants with $400,900 in premiums delinquent for
periods ranging from 13 months to 65 months disclosed that OPSB had made
approximately $293,500 in premium subsidies in addition to $513,300 in claims
payments. OPSB had only recovered $22,100 from 7 of the 10 participants (the
lower of delinquent premiums and claims paid); no payments were recovered
from the remaining 3 participants. For example, one participant did not make 44
premium payments totaling $15,600 but OPSB continued to make subsidy
payments totaling $42,600 and pay claims totaling $136,300 on behalf of this
participant. Although the participant was paid $148,500 in salary during this
period, OPSB only recovered approximately $6,400.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OPSB
a. establish a process to maintain comprehensive records to identify all plan
participants who have not paid premiums;
b. establish a procedure to remove plan participants from benefit coverage
if insurance premiums are not paid;
c. recoup premiums in full, including amounts noted above, more
frequently than annually; and
d. discontinue subsidy payments and claim reimbursements for participants
with unpaid premiums.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 2
OPSB did not complete required claims eligibility audits or pursue recovery
of all improper payments identified in a timely manner.
Analysis
OPSB did not complete required claims eligibility audits or pursue recovery of all
improper payments identified by the audits in a timely manner. These audits are
performed annually by OPSB personnel to ensure that claims processed and paid
by plan administrators and reimbursed by OPSB are for valid and eligible
participants. These audits review selected payment activity of the program’s six
plans that are self-funded by the State during a plan year to identify instances
where invalid claims were paid, such as claims paid for individuals whose
coverage had terminated. OPSB procedures state that depending on the cause of
the invalid claim, OPSB will seek reimbursement from the plan administrator or
the plan participant. OPSB procedures further provide that the audits are to be
completed and finalized by September 1st of the calendar year following the
claims.
The claims eligibility audits for calendar year 2023 identified approximately
2,700 claims totaling $3.2 million paid on behalf of participants that did not pay
their insurance premiums. Our review disclosed the audits conducted were not
timely. Specifically, our test of 20 audits3 for calendar years 2020 through 2023
disclosed that 16 of the audits were completed 4 to 11 months after they were due.
For example, five 2022 audits due by September 1, 2023 were completed between
January 2024 and March 2024.
Our review further disclosed that OPSB did not timely pursue recovery of certain
invalid claim payments identified by the audits. Specifically, our review of $1.7
million in invalid claims identified by the calendar year 2022 audits disclosed that
OPSB did not attempt to recover the invalid claims until August 2024 (5 months
after the audit was completed).
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, OPSB advised that a formal procedure was developed in
December 2022 to identify deadlines and ensure audits are completed as required.
Additionally, OPSB advised that improvements to the collection process would be
implemented by January 2023. Although improvements were noted during the
current audit, delays continue to exist as previously described.
3 We reviewed the audits performed for calendar years 2020 through 2023 for the five plans that
the administrator was billed.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPSB
a. conduct claims audits within the required timeframe (repeat), and
b. timely recover improper payments identified by the audits.
Finding 3
Contract audits of the pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) were not completed
in a timely manner.
Analysis
Contract audits of the PBM were not completed in a timely manner resulting in
delays in the identification of potential program deficiencies and any related
amounts due the State, such as penalties related to performance guarantees.
OPSB contracts with a vendor to conduct annual audits of the State’s Pharmacy
Benefits program. The scope of this audit includes administrative and operational
procedures, claims processing (accuracy, timing, and compliance), and
compliance with performance guarantees and other contract requirements. The
contract with the vendor required the audits to be completed by December 31st
following the end of the plan year. Payments to this vendor between fiscal years
2022 and 2025 totaled approximately $237,000.
Our review of the PBM audits disclosed that they were not completed timely.
Specifically, the audit of the 2019 plan year was completed in March 2024 (38
months late) and the audit of the 2020 plan year was completed in April 2025 (39
months late). Furthermore, the audits for plan years 2021 through 2023 have not
been completed as of the end of our audit fieldwork in August 2025.
The failure to conduct timely audits is significant because they often identify
deficiencies and result in penalties. For example, the 2019 and 2020 audits
assessed penalties totaling $21,000 and $183,000, respectively. Although OPSB
was aware of these delays and worked with the vendor to facilitate completion
and avoid additional delays, these efforts did not resolve the problem. In addition,
the contract with the vendor did not include a provision for financial penalties or
liquidated damages.
Recommendation 3
We recommend OPSB
a. ensure past due audits noted in this finding are completed,
b. ensure that future audits are completed within the required timeframe,
and
15

--- Page 18 ---
c. consider including in future audit contracts a provision for financial
penalties or liquidated damages for failure to meet established deadlines.
State Personnel Management System (SPMS) Agency Payroll
Background
OPSB is responsible for receiving and consolidating payroll activity from 68 State
Personnel Management System (SPMS) agencies for submission to the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) to process employee payroll which totaled
approximately $4.8 billion during fiscal year 2024. Each SPMS agency is
responsible for administering its own payroll activity, including reviewing
system-generated error reports to help them identify, investigate, and correct
discrepancies, such as employee timesheets with no time entered, no time
submitted, or no time approved.
Ideally, agencies should correct all errors prior to OPSB submitting the payroll to
CPB to prevent improper payments. However, if all discrepancies are not
corrected prior to the deadline for payroll submission, SPMS agencies still submit
their payroll to OPSB for processing. OPSB advised that it requires SPMS
agencies to certify that they are submitting accurate payroll information for the
employees of their agency, and they are responsible to resolve any inaccuracies
identified or adjustments needed.
OPSB generates error reports to assist agencies in correcting any discrepancies
prior to forwarding the payroll to CPB. OPSB will generally email copies of
these reports to the agencies with outstanding discrepancies requiring correction
and periodically follow-up on the related discrepancies. However, the existence
of uncorrected discrepancies will not stop CPB from processing the payroll.
Consequently, it is critical that outstanding discrepancies be investigated and
resolved, regardless of the specific agency involved, to ensure that all payroll
payments were valid.
Finding 4
OPSB did not ensure that SPMS agencies resolved instances when an
employee did not complete a timesheet even though Statewide Personnel
System (SPS) reports identified these discrepancies.
Analysis
OPSB did not ensure that SPMS agencies resolved instances when an employee
did not complete a timesheet even though SPS reports identified these
16

--- Page 19 ---
discrepancies. State regulations generally require a time record signed by the
applicable employee and approved by supervisory personnel unless a written
exemption is obtained from the Secretary of the Department of Budget and
Management. SPS generates a No Time Entered report that lists employees who
did not prepare a timesheet. As noted above, employees will continue to be paid
even if no timesheet is prepared.
Our review of the No Time Entered reports for the six pay periods between
January 8, 2025 to February 18, 2025 and June 26, 2024 to August 6, 2024
identified 130 employees at 22 SPMS agencies that were listed on one or more of
the reports (including 7 that were on all 6 reports) because no timesheet had been
prepared. These employees received compensation totaling approximately
$740,000 for the six pay periods reviewed.
We tested 43 payroll records related to 16 employees4 from calendar years 2024
and 2025 that were paid for 4,400 hours valued at approximately $323,000. Our
test disclosed that 33 of the payroll records related to 12 employees with a total of
2,640 hours valued at approximately $224,000 did not have any time entered. Of
the 33 payroll records, 18 records related to 7 employees were not submitted as
required with a total of 1,440 hours valued at approximately $111,000. The
remaining payroll records relating to five employees did not need to be completed
as the employee was exempt from completing a timesheet for reasons, as outlined
in State regulations.
Although OPSB notified the related agencies of the missing timesheets, no
corrective action was taken and OPSB did not follow-up with the agency until
OLA inquiry. While the temporary failure to complete a timesheet may be
justified (for example, an employee on leave), a timesheet should be submitted at
some point to support the hours were worked.
A similar condition regarding OPSB not ensuring that SPMS agencies addressed
all outstanding payroll discrepancies (such as incomplete timesheets) was noted in
our prior audit report. In response to that report, OPSB indicated that by February
2023 a process would be implemented to periodically review timesheets that had
not been entered and notify agencies of discrepancies. Although OPSB developed
a process to perform periodic reviews to address payroll discrepancies, we were
advised during our current audit that agencies did not always take corrective
action. OPSB did not follow up with these agencies, including conferring with
4 Our test items were selected based on significance of hours paid without a corresponding
timesheet. Payroll records for calendar years 2024 and 2025 were queried in May and March
2025, respectively.
17

--- Page 20 ---
senior leadership at the related agency for any agencies that were routinely
identified on the aforementioned reports.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that OPSB
a. ensure SPMS agencies resolve all outstanding payroll processing
discrepancies timely, including the aforementioned 7 employees for whom
no timesheet was submitted; and
b. take appropriate corrective action for agencies that fail to resolve the
discrepancies timely (repeat).
Finding 5
OPSB did not follow up when it identified employees who were not removed
from the payroll timely to ensure the agencies recovered any amounts
improperly paid.
Analysis
OPSB did not follow up when it identified employees who were not removed
from the payroll timely to ensure the agencies recovered any amounts improperly
paid. In response to our prior report, OPSB generated bi-weekly reports of
payments made after an employee’s separation and notified the respective
agencies. Our review disclosed that OPSB did not always follow up with
agencies when agencies did not subsequently investigate employees that were not
removed from the payroll timely and recoup the related payments that were
improperly paid.
We obtained a report of all separations processed in SPS for fiscal year 2024 and
compared the effective date of the separation to the date it was processed in SPS.
Our review disclosed that 915 separations were processed in SPS between 5 and
534 days after the effective date of separation including 23 employees at seven
agencies who received approximately $135,100 after their effective date of
separation. Our test of 13 of these employees disclosed that 4 had payments
totaling approximately $35,900 after they separated that appeared to be improper5
including 2 that had previously been identified on OPSB’s bi-weekly review of
payments. After we brought this to OPSB’s attention, the applicable agency
recovered improper payments totaling $25,800 but there was no documentation
that the remaining $10,100 has been recovered.
5 Payments to the remaining 9 employees were proper due to final leave payout, settlement
agreement, incorrect termination date in the system, or other payroll correction.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Similar conditions were commented on in our preceding audit report. As noted
above, in response to that report, OPSB generates bi-weekly reports of certain
payments but has not established a comprehensive procedure for investigating and
recovering improper payments identified on those reports. According to OPSB
personnel, additional policies and procedures related to these follow-up actions
are being developed but have not yet been implemented as of the end of our
fieldwork.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that OPSB identify any earnings paid after an employee left
State service and ensure agencies investigate and recoup any overpayments,
including those noted above (repeat).
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
Background Information
The State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
provides that an employee who works more than the normal workweek is entitled
to compensation in the form of payment or compensation time. Certain
employees with modified workdays, such as law enforcement, calculate overtime
based on the greater of time worked in excess of 40 hours in a workweek or time
worked in excess of an established workday. As depicted in Figure 4, SPMS
agency overtime has increased significantly during the audit period from
approximately $231.3 million in calendar year 2021 to $342.6 million in 2024
(approximately 48 percent).
19

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 4
SPMS Agency Overtime
Calendar Years 2021 to 2024
$400,000,000
$300,000,000
$200,000,000
$100,000,000
$0
2021 2022 2023 2024
Source: Central Payroll Bureau Payroll Records
As noted in Figure 5, five departments made up 97 percent of SPMS agency
overtime in calendar year 2024. According to OPSB personnel, overtime at the
five departments is higher than other State agencies due in part to high vacancy
rates, minimum staffing level requirements (such as for prison guards), and
scheduling challenges. For example, vacancy rates at the five agencies were
between 7.9 percent and 18 percent as of January 2025.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 5
Overtime in Select SPMS Agencies
Calendar Year 2024
Maryland
(in millions)
Department of
Health, $52.5
Department of
Department of
Public Safety
State Police,
and
$47.9
Correctional
Department of
Services, $205.2
Juvenile
Services, $19.0
Department of
Human
Other, $9.1 Services, $8.9
Source: Central Payroll Bureau Payroll Records
Finding 6
OPSB did not have a comprehensive process to monitor and provide
guidance to address employees with significant overtime including 775
employees we identified whose overtime earnings consistently exceeded their
regular base salary.
Analysis
OPSB did not have a comprehensive process to monitor and provide guidance to
agencies to manage and address employees with significant overtime including
775 employees we identified whose overtime earnings consistently exceeded their
regular base salary. Rather, OPSB’s efforts were limited to sending agencies a
report of individuals receiving compensation of more than $10,000 in a pay
period for additional review. For example, our review disclosed the following:
• OPSB did not analyze payroll data to identify employees who earned
excessive overtime (such as more than 50 percent of their regular base salary)
or who consistently had material overtime. Our analysis of SPMS payroll
data between calendar years 2022 and 2024 disclosed that certain employees
consistently received significant amounts of overtime. For example, 3,923
employees received overtime payments in calendar year 2024 that totaled 50
percent or more of their regular base salary, including 1,457 employees whose
21

--- Page 24 ---
overtime earnings met or exceeded their base salary. Moreover, 775
employees also received overtime pay that met or exceeded their regular base
salary for each of the three years during calendar years 2022 through 2024
(see Figure 6 for examples of five of these employees).
Figure 6
Examples of Employees with Recurring Excessive Overtime
2022 2023 2024
Example Agency
Regular Overtime Regular Overtime Regular Overtime
Employee 1 DPSCS $59,675 $123,201 $61,942 $136,595 $67,815 $145,085
Employee 2 MDH 84,640 139,279 95,807 182,739 108,683 179,931
Employee 3 MDH 69,548 138,242 72,841 149,248 79,398 145,174
Employee 4 MDH 67,412 128,168 70,812 145,268 77,634 141,540
Employee 5 MSP 138,916 196,817 150,103 219,397 163,785 226,189
Source: Central Payroll Bureau Payroll Records
• OPSB did not analyze payroll data to identify employees who consistently
earned overtime while using paid leave that could be indicative of abusive
overtime usage, and/or opportunities to modify scheduling to reduce overtime.
SPMS regulations and the State’s collective bargaining agreements include
paid leave in work time. Therefore, SPMS employees’ personal, annual, sick,
and other paid leave is counted towards the 40-hour workweek and overtime
calculations. For example, if an employee’s normal workday is 8 hours, and
they took 4 hours of annual leave but worked 8 hours the same day, they
would earn 4 hours of overtime.
We analyzed calendar year 2024 payroll records for one large agency and
identified 3,047 employees with one or more instances in which they received
over $1,000 in gross overtime earnings in pay periods where they used at least
three full days of paid leave. As noted above, this practice is not prohibited
but could be indicative of potential abusive overtime.
• OPSB had not established sufficient policies and procedures to ensure
agencies properly monitored and controlled overtime usage. Specifically,
DBM had not required OPSB to take action to ensure that all agencies
implemented an overtime policy or provide guidance to agencies as to what
basic requirements should be included, such as pre-approval of overtime and a
review by agency management of material and unusual overtime usage for
propriety.
22

--- Page 25 ---
State law requires DBM to adopt regulations to prevent unnecessary overtime at
agencies under SPMS. Based on this statutory authority DBM through OPSB
should develop guidance and policies for SPMS agencies to better manage
overtime activity.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. In response to that
report, OPSB agreed to work with agencies to perform data analysis to identify
employees with potentially excessive overtime. OPSB also agreed to establish
processes and policies for monitoring overtime and for addressing agencies with
consistently high overtime, including ensuring that agencies submit documented
justifications and submit action plans for employees who earn high amounts of
overtime. We were advised during our current audit that these corrective actions
were not implemented, due in part, to challenges with obtaining input from
agencies.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that OPSB develop and implement comprehensive policies
and procedures for overtime usage in consultation with SPMS agencies and
other DBM units. Specifically, we recommend that these procedures and
policies include
a. routinely performing data analysis to identify employees with potentially
excessive overtime (repeat);
b. requiring documented justifications from the respective agencies for
employees earning excessive overtime and corrective action plans from
the agencies to reduce overtime payments in the future (repeat);
c. ensuring that agencies establish appropriate agency-based policies for
managing and controlling overtime, and providing guidance as to the
basic requirements such policies should include (repeat); and
d. working in conjunction with the appropriate DBM units, including those
with budgetary authority, to address agencies with consistently excessive
overtime (such as adding additional positions) (repeat).
23

--- Page 26 ---
Healthcare Plan Administrator Contracts
Finding 7
OPSB’s contracts with two plan administrators did not specify the consumer
price index (CPI) to be used to calculate administrative fees resulting in
OPSB paying between $3.3 million and $6.6 million more in administrative
fees over the term of the contracts.
Analysis
OPSB’s contracts with two plan administrators6 did not specify the CPI to be used
to calculate administrative fees, which totaled $55.4 million in calendar year
2024. There are different categories of CPI (such as CPI specific to medical
services and CPI for all goods/services) and a different CPI each month. The
contracts provided that the plan administrator may increase the administrative fee
annually, after the initial three years of the contract, based on the CPI but did not
specify which CPI category or month was to be used.
Our review of the administrative fee calculations during the term of the contracts
(2015 through 2025) disclosed that the plan administrators did not consistently
use a category or month’s CPI to calculate the administrative fee. Rather, the CPI
category and month changed generally to maximize the fees. For example, one
plan administrator used a different CPI category each year between 2018 and
2025. We recalculated the administrative fee for calendar years 2021 through
May 2025 using the lesser of the CPI for medical services or for all good/services
and used a consistent month. Based on our calculation OPSB could have saved
between $3.3 million and $6.6 million had the contract been more specific on the
CPI to be used.
After we brought these concerns to OPSB’s attention, OPSB modified the request
for proposal for its new plan administrator contract to specify that the
administrative fee would be based on the lesser of the annual CPI for medical
services or all goods/services and that a consistent month would be used. The
failure to enforce these requirements could result in OPSB paying higher
administrative fees than necessary.
6 We selected these two plan administrator contracts to review as these were OPSB’s only plan
administrator contracts that had this particular provision regarding administrative fee increases.
These two plan administrator contracts were OPSB’s two self-insured plans (EPO and PPO).
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that OPSB ensure its plan administrator contracts specify
the category and month’s CPI to be used for calculating the administrative
fee, and that the plan administrators adhere to these requirements.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 8 and 9 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DBM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) for the
period beginning November 1, 2021 and ending February 28, 2025. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OPSB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included OPSB’s payment of State employees and retirees
health insurance and prescription drug benefit claims, monitoring of health care
and prescription drug benefit administrators, determination of participant
eligibility, processing of personnel and payroll transactions for certain State
agencies, and information systems security and control. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit also included certain support services (such as payroll) provided by
OPSB to DBM’s – Office of the Secretary. Conversely, our audit did not include
certain support services provided to OPSB by the Office of the Secretary. These
support services (such as procurements and maintenance of certain accounting
records) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 1, 2021 to February 28, 2025, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of OPSB’s operations. Generally,
26

--- Page 29 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data), and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the Statewide Personnel System, Pre-Offer Check
(POC) database, and the Benefits Administration System for the purpose of
selecting test items, such as new hires and rate changes, determining the accuracy
and completeness of the POC database, and for assessing user access. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
OSPB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OPSB, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
27

--- Page 30 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OPSB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OPSB that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that findings in this report fall under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to OPSB and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from DBM, on behalf of OPSB, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
28

--- Page 31 ---
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DBM
regarding the results of our review of its response.
29

--- Page 32 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Employee Benefit Programs
Finding 1
OPSB did not have effective procedures to identify and remove coverage for
plan participants that did not pay their premiums. We noted that OPSB
continued to make subsidy payments and claims reimbursements on behalf
of plan participants with unpaid premiums.
We recommend that OPSB
a. establish a process to maintain comprehensive records to identify all plan
participants who have not paid premiums;
b. establish a procedure to remove plan participants from benefit coverage
if insurance premiums are not paid;
c. recoup premiums in full, including amounts noted above, more
frequently than annually; and
d. discontinue subsidy payments and claim reimbursements for participants
with unpaid premiums.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Procedures to Identify Outstanding Premiums (Not Factually Accurate)
The Analysis states that OPSB does not have effective procedures to
identify plan participants who do not pay their premiums. OPSB does
track plan participants who have not paid premiums through an open
invoice report that provides the name, invoice category, premium month,
and balance due. OPSB practice has been to leverage this report to send
each plan participant with unpaid premiums a notice every month
alerting them to their unpaid premiums. These notices were not
considered bills and were not previously followed up to ensure payment
of unpaid premiums was received, as past practice was to follow up
during our claims eligibility audits. As such, OPSB does have a process
to identify unpaid premiums.
Additionally, OPSB would like to note that this practice has been
performed through one of our contractors using a legacy system.
Unfortunately, due to this and as noted by the auditors in their analysis,
we have not been able to provide evidence of the notices sent prior to
CY2025.
Termination of Benefits due to Unpaid Premiums (Additional Comment)
Page 1 of 23

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
The Analysis also identifies OPSB continuing to make subsidy payments
and pay claims for employees who had unpaid premiums, and calculates
the dollar value of these payments with the implication that these were
all improper payments and that benefits should immediately be
terminated. This is not accurate as it does not recognize various
situations where, at least for a limited time, there may be situations that
limit the ability of OPSB to terminate benefits, as recommended and
suggested in the auditor’s recommendation. Circumstances and
situations that limit the ability of OPSB to terminate benefits include
employees who are out on Family and Medical Leave in accordance with
the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA); those entitled to a leave of
absence as a reasonable accommodation for a disability in accordance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA); Leave of Absence due
to Workers’ Compensation Claim; and changes in job status that result in
open invoices that may be invalid, (e.g. contractual conversion to regular
full-time employee, retirement or a job change between agencies). These
instances where terminating benefits would be improper are difficult to
distinguish from instances where termination would be proper absent
close evaluation of the individual record and improper terminations
create significant legal and financial risks far in excess of the cost of
maintaining coverage.
Impact of COVID PHE (Additional Comment)
The Analysis further does not acknowledge the impact of the COVID
Public Health Emergency beginning March 13, 2020 and ending July 10,
2023, during which time OPSB was not allowed to terminate benefits or
collect on unpaid premiums. In addition to the direct effect that
extended the period of time individuals could remain delinquent, it
created a multi-year backlog that had to be worked through. Efforts to
identify participants and establish procedures for terminating benefit
coverage were not feasible until the end of the PHE as, without an end
date, identifying individuals that were still employed by benefit group,
level of coverage, transition from subsidized to nonsubsidized, or a
break in service could not be completed.
Population of Individuals This Issue is Related To (Additional Comment)
NOTE: OPSB believes that the issues noted related to this finding were
primarily related to OSPB’s treatment of unpaid premiums related to
COBRA and contractual employees. The corrective actions noted below
are actions that have or will be taken to address this issue related to these
groups that are receiving health benefits through the State contracts.
Page 2 of 23

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: May 2020
OPSB believes and understands it is important to have a process to
identify all plan participants who have not paid premiums; however, we
are disagreeing with this recommendation as OPSB already has a
process in place, since March 2020, to identify all plan participants who
have not paid premiums. These individuals are sent notices every month
alerting them to their unpaid premiums.
Auditor’s Comment: OPSB disagrees with recommendation 1a and maintains
that the finding analysis is factually inaccurate because OPSB does track plan
participants who have not paid premiums. However, OPSB acknowledges that
documentation of this process was not maintained. In addition, OPSB makes
certain other assertions that are not consistent with our results. For example,
OPSB indicates that the finding may be due to COVID but all of the test items
were actively enrolled at the end of calendar year 2024 which was after COVID
had ended. As a result, we continue to believe that the analysis is accurate and
recommendation 1a is valid.
Page 3 of 23

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
OPSB agrees that, as appropriate, individuals should not continue to
receive benefit coverage if insurance premiums are not paid. However,
we want to acknowledge there are certain situations where it is not
feasible for OPSB to remove these plan participants as the
Recommendation suggests due considerations noted above in the
response to the Analysis.
As noted above in response to the Analysis, OPSB understands that this
finding was primarily related to COBRA and contractual employees.
OPSB developed beginning in May 2024 an automated monthly process
to identify and terminate COBRA participants who had not paid
premiums. OPSB is required by law to provide a 30 day grace period,
but then automatically terminates coverage retroactive to when the
COBRA participant first became delinquent on paying premiums. All
claims during this period are recovered automatically with the exception
of prescription drugs (these are processed in real time and so not
available to be recovered), which are then automatically sent for
collections.
Contractual employees will be incorporated into Workday payroll
deductions on Jan 1, 2026 or July 1, 2026 (depending on the
organization). At that point, all contractual employees will have
premium payments automatically deducted from payroll and have any
non-payment collected in arrears against future payroll. The
implementation of a process to collect unpaid premium against future
payroll will also apply to regular employees. As such, with this change,
there will not be a need to institute a process for termination of benefits
due to unpaid premiums.
Auditor’s Comment: While OPSB agrees with recommendation 1b, it notes that
there are certain circumstances for at least a limited time in which OPSB would
not be allowed to terminate benefits and that improper terminations could result in
significant legal and financial risks. However, these circumstances, while
reasonable, should not dictate a universal practice that prevents OPSB from
terminating benefits in all situations. In this regard, OPSB did not provide
documentation to indicate that these circumstances applied to the test items noted
in the analysis.
Page 4 of 23

--- Page 37 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
OPSB has changed its collections policy to reflect this Recommendation.
Specifically, OPSB previously collected the lower of unpaid claims or
unpaid premiums; going forward, OPSB will collect all unpaid
premiums.
OPSB has implemented procedures to collect unpaid premiums, as
appropriate, and will shortly have the capability to do so more frequently
than annually:
● Unpaid premiums from plan year 2024 have been identified and
all individuals with unpaid premiums will be sent a final notice
of unpaid premiums by December 2025 informing them that
absent settlement of their outstanding payments, their debt will
be sent to collections within 45 days. As these collections have
not yet begun, OPSB will apply the updated policy and collect
unpaid premiums (not the lower of unpaid claims or premiums).
● For unpaid premiums for plan year 2025, OPSB will send a final
notice of unpaid premiums in April 2026, also providing 45 days
notice prior to submitting them to collections.
● For unpaid premiums in plan year 2026 and beyond, OPSB will
be able to much more regularly and effectively collect unpaid
premiums as the Central Payroll Bureau integration into
Workday goes live. This integration allows OPSB to deduct
premiums from payroll for contractual employees – essentially
eliminating a significant source of unpaid premiums currently –
and permits OPSB to collect unpaid premiums in arrears against
subsequent payrolls, allowing much more dynamic and reliable
collections.
OPSB has also implemented procedures to collect unpaid premiums
from former employees who are participating in COBRA. These
procedures are outlined above in response to Recommendation 1.b.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
Unpaid premiums will be followed up as outlined above for all
individuals enrolled in a benefit plan. This should reduce claim
reimbursements for participants with unpaid premiums. As noted above
we want to acknowledge that there are certain situations where
discontinuing claims reimbursement is not feasible for the reasons
identified in the response to the Analysis.
The majority of the subsidies referred to in the auditor analysis relate to
subsidies paid for contractual employees. State subsidy for contractual
Page 5 of 23

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
employees for each year is based on 75% of the total premium cost of
the health insurance plan selections made by active contractual
employees for a specific month in the fall. For FY 2026, that month was
October 2024. Contractual employees have historically been billed
directly by OPSB for the remaining 25% of the total premium cost of
their plan selections. (Note, there are a few plans that receive no
employer subsidy and are paid for entirely by the contractual employee.)
In FY 2027, the contractual employee's portion of the total premium cost
of their plan selections will be withheld from their paychecks (as is
currently done for regular employees) and subsidies will be collected in
the same manner as done for regular employees.
Page 6 of 23

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
OPSB did not complete required claims eligibility audits or pursue recovery
of all improper payments identified in a timely manner.
We recommend that OPSB
a. conduct claims audits within the required timeframe (repeat), and
b. timely recover improper payments identified by the audits.
Agency Response
Analysis Additional comments
Impact of COVID PHE (Additional Comment)
The Analysis does not acknowledge the impact of the COVID Public
Health Emergency (PHE) beginning March 13, 2020 and ending July 10,
2023. The PHE significantly disrupted normal health plan operations
and created a backlog of incomplete claims eligibility audits.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2026
In the roughly 2 years since the PHE concluded, OPSB has completed
2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023 audits in full. It has also completed
all components of the 2024 audit analysis (final discussions continue
with one carrier over certain carrier fees - expect these to conclude no
later than January 23, 2026). Completing essentially 6 audits in 2 years
demonstrates OPSB’s ability to conduct claims eligibility audits timely.
There is also significant reason to believe such timeliness is durable as
conducting eligibility audits and recovering improper payments required
an integration between the system of record (Workday) and the legacy
billing system (BAS) that had not previously existed but has now been
deployed since May 2024. Due to this integration as well as process
improvements, eligibility audit timelines have been reduced from 18
months prior to the PHE to less than 6 months (e.g. for the 2024 audits
of two carriers).
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
Please provide details of OPSB will update its current SOPs to more clearly articulate current
corrective action or practice for audits, which is to complete the audit analysis, then share the
explain disagreement. findings with the carriers. The carriers review and at times dispute the
analysis, which can impact responsibility for payments at the plan
participant level. Once this carrier review is finalized, OPSB bills the
carriers for the amounts due from the audit and will also bill individual
plan participants for amounts due.
Page 7 of 23

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
OPSB has completed the audit analysis for the 2024 plan year eligibility
audit and is currently finalizing the carrier review as noted in the
response to Recommendation 2.a. Once the carrier review is completed
and final participant balances are available, OPSB will notify
participants with unpaid premiums of amounts due within 30 days.
In addition, going forward, a process has been developed to notify and
collect on unpaid premiums in a timely manner as outlined above in the
response to Recommendation 1.c.
Page 8 of 23

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
Contract audits of the pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) were not completed
in a timely manner.
We recommend OPSB
a. ensure past due audits noted in this finding are completed,
b. ensure that future audits are completed within the required timeframe,
and
c. consider including in future audit contracts a provision for financial
penalties or liquidated damages for failure to meet established deadlines.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2026
The completion date for the past-due audits cited in this finding is
targeted for December 2026.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2027
OPSB will insert provisions for liquidated damages into the new Request
For Proposal (RFP) and will hold monthly progress meetings. This dual
approach is designed to foster immediate engagement and resolution of
any variables that could impede the project timeline to help ensure audits
are completed in a timely manner.
OPSB will continue to take action and monitor contractors to ensure
future audits are completed within the required timeframe. The estimated
completion date of December 2027 reflects the first full audit cycle
under the new RFP, which will include the additional tools we believe
will improve contractor success in meeting deadlines and ensure timely
audits.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2026
Please provide details of Provisions for financial penalties or liquidated damages for failure to
corrective action or meet established deadlines will be inserted into the upcoming Request
explain disagreement. for Proposal (RFP) for Audit Services of the State Employee & Retiree
Benefits Programs, State Medical Director and Occupational Medical
Services, and Employee Assistance Program. The targeted RFP release
Page 9 of 23

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
date for the Audit Services contract is ~May 2026 with an award by
~August 2026. We anticipate this recommendation to be implemented
when the new contract is awarded that includes this language (i.e.,
August 2026). The estimated completion date of December 2026 (noted
above) provides additional time to account for any unforeseen events.
Page 10 of 23

--- Page 43 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
State Personnel Management System (SPMS) Agency Payroll
Finding 4
OPSB did not ensure that SPMS agencies resolved instances when an
employee did not complete a timesheet even though Statewide Personnel
System (SPS) reports identified these discrepancies.
We recommend that OPSB
a. ensure SPMS agencies resolve all outstanding payroll processing
discrepancies timely, including the aforementioned 7 employees for whom
no timesheet was submitted; and
b. take appropriate corrective action for agencies that fail to resolve the
discrepancies timely (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Additional comments
Please provide Summary of Enhancements to Current Process
additional comments as OPSB has proposed an approach that seeks to address the main issue
deemed necessary. identified in this Finding. We have proposed below to strengthen the
language in the current Combined Time Report to note the impact to
pay and leave if the errors identified on the report are not corrected.
Additionally, we will escalate this communication, sending it to Agency
management up to the Deputy Secretary for awareness. In addition,
OPSB will require agency leadership to semi-annually certify that
diligent follow-up on identified errors has been successfully performed.
This process will also allow for agencies to connect with OPSB for
additional guidance and training needed to ensure agencies are meeting
expectations and performing their responsibilities adequately.
Discussion of Agency Responsibility, Potential Risk, and Explanation
for Why Proposed Corrective Actions are in the Best Interest of the
State
OPSB notes that the premise of this Recommendation – namely, that
OPSB as the control agency for HR is responsible for ensuring that all
timesheet and payroll errors are corrected in all SPMS agencies – could
be broadly read to, and was articulated in the exit meeting to, seek to
have OPSB follow up with each agency on each timesheet and payroll
error and continue to follow up regularly on each error until it is
resolved, including escalating to agency leadership as often as needed to
ensure they are resolved. By requiring OPSB to follow up without
Page 11 of 23

--- Page 44 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
limitation until every error is corrected, this would make OPSB
responsible for the accuracy of every timesheet and payroll transaction
in the SPMS.
OPSB believes that this outcome would be cost inefficient for the State
and respectfully disagrees that this is OPSB’s proper responsibility.
The SPMS has delegated HR functions and each Agency has a
designated authority who attests to, and acknowledges the responsibility
to, resolve and reconcile all payroll and timekeeping errors at the
conclusion of each payroll period. Agency HR staff do not have any
reporting relationship to OPSB and each agency’s individual
responsibility and authority is not altered by OPSB’s provision of tools
to assist agency execution.
In addition, though the Analysis identifies time paid without a
timesheet, several situations may result in a finding of an unsubmitted
timesheet, including employee error and manager approval errors. The
pay implications of these errors include time adjustments without pay
change implications (for example, correcting time to reflect leave
usage) as well as corrections that result in changes in pay amount. In the
latter scenario, correction can result in employees owing the State for
overpaid wages or in employees receiving unpaid time and overtime. It
is extremely difficult to estimate what share of timesheet errors result in
no-pay-change adjustments, overpayment liabilities, or underpayment
corrections without investigating each case; however, we anticipate that
the primary financial exposure for the State would be on overstated
leave pay outs, which will be modest. To further reduce this risk, we
are exploring opportunities to enhance the leave pay out process to help
ensure any overlooked errors, as noted in the finding, have been
properly corrected.
OPSB identifies an average of nearly 3,000 employees with nearly
4,000 individual errors related to incomplete, unsubmitted, unapproved,
or other types of timesheet issues every pay period for agencies. In all,
an average of ~100,000 individual errors occur across nearly 80,000
employees per year. For each of these errors, follow-up requires staff
time from OPSB, agency HR timekeepers and staff, managers, and
employees; errors often require multiple follow-ups, with certain types
(such as those related to terminated employees) requiring substantial
investigation effort to correct.
Instead of implementing such a process, which would be cost
inefficient for the State and require duplicative processes (i.e., OPSB
Page 12 of 23

--- Page 45 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
would essentially be performing the same tasks and functions agencies
perform and are responsible for), we have proposed the improvements
noted below to support agency action, as agencies are in the best
position to conduct investigations and follow up with individuals to
ensure payroll discrepancies are resolved.
Recommendation 4a Agree in part Estimated Completion Date: December 2026
Please provide details of OPSB contacted the relevant agencies and resolved the timekeeping
corrective action or errors with the 12 employees identified in the audit, including the
explain disagreement. aforementioned 7 employees for whom no timesheet was submitted.
OPSB will seek to enhance its processes to improve follow-up on
payroll discrepancies identified. Specifically, OPSB will strengthen the
language included in Combined Time Report that is regularly run and
sent to each SPMS agency, detailing the impact to pay and leave, and
citing the governing law and regulation. OPSB will also escalate this
communication, sending it to Agency management up to the Deputy
Secretary for awareness.
OPSB will also institute a new certification requirement for SPMS
agencies, requiring them to semi-annually certify that they are taking
diligent efforts to correct payroll discrepancies. This certification
would also acknowledge that the agency understands the instructions
for how to run cumulative discrepancy reports and will instruct agencies
to reach out to OPSB to seek advice on how to resolve if a discrepancy
has been outstanding for more than 3 months. OPSB will conduct
periodic spot checks of outstanding payroll discrepancies to evaluate
agency progress, with a focus on no time entered and retro termination
scenarios. This will provide awareness in order for OPSB to be able to
assess root causes, escalate to Agency leadership, and provide guidance
on next steps the agency should take or whether there is anything OPSB
can do to assist.
OPSB will also evaluate the potential to send out an annual notification
to all supervisors requiring them to acknowledge that they have to
manage the positive timekeeping of their staff and citing the relevant
regulations (COMAR 17.04.11.20). As part of OPSB’s evaluation, it is
possible we will need to reach out to Bargaining Unit S’s exclusive
representative.
That said, OPSB would reiterate the concerns with the broader premise
of this Recommendation for the reasons noted above in the response to
the Analysis. OPSB believes that a broad reading of the premise of this
Page 13 of 23

--- Page 46 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Recommendation would be cost inefficient for the State and
respectfully disagrees that it is OPSB’s proper responsibility.
Recommendation 4b Agree in part Estimated Completion Date: December 2026
Please provide details of Authority to resolve payroll discrepancies resides with each agency and
corrective action or OPSB has limited authority to take independent “corrective actions.”
explain disagreement. Where agencies fail to take action on their own as identified in the spot
checks noted above, OPSB will elevate concerns and take the steps
outlined in response to Recommendation 4.a, above. Additionally, for
agencies that are consistently having difficulty in timely resolving the
discrepancies identified, OPSB may proactively reach out to provide
additional training and to work with the agency on how they can
improve their efforts.
Auditor’s Comment: OPSB disagrees that its responsibility as a control agency
includes ensuring timesheet and payroll errors are corrected for all SPMS
agencies and that pursuing these errors would be inefficient. However, we
continue to believe that due to its statutory authority over SPMS agencies, which
includes enforcing compliance with regulations, OPSB is ultimately responsible
for these actions.
Page 14 of 23

--- Page 47 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
OPSB did not follow up when it identified employees who were not removed
from the payroll timely to ensure the agencies recovered any amounts
improperly paid.
We recommend that OPSB identify any earnings paid after an employee left
State service and ensure agencies investigate and recoup any overpayments,
including those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Additional Comments
Please provide OPSB notes that the Recommendation associated with Finding 5 is
additional comments as similar to the Recommendations in Finding 4. Notably, Finding 4’s
deemed necessary. Recommendations instruct OPSB to ensure SPMS agencies resolve all
outstanding payroll processing discrepancies timely and earnings paid to
an employee after they have left State service are a type of payroll error.
Thus, we have proposed enhancements to the current process which
encompasses these types of payroll errors and additionally, the same
comments in the response to Recommendation 4 regarding functions that
are the agency responsibility and explanation for why proposed
corrective actions are in the best interest of the State apply to the issues
noted in Finding 5.
Recommendation 5 Agree in part Estimated Completion Date: December 2026
Please provide details of This Recommendation is that “OPSB identify any regular earnings paid
corrective action or after an employee left State service”. OPSB already runs a report each
explain disagreement. pay period that identifies any employee who was terminated from State
service through a backdated termination process in Workday. The
report, titled “Possible Retro Terminations”, identifies each employee
who could be due an annual leave payout and provides detailed
information on the termination and possible overpayments. This report
is analyzed and shared with each affected Agency, instructing the
Agency to follow up and collect the overpayments that may have
resulted.
The Recommendation also states that OPSB should “ensure agencies
investigate and recoup any overpayments.” This mirrors the issues raised
in Finding 4 and so OPSB will seek to enhance its processes to improve
follow-up on payroll discrepancies as outlined in the response to
Recommendation 4.a and is actively following up (multiple touch points
Page 15 of 23

--- Page 48 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
have been held) to resolve the 3 retro terminations related to the $10,100
noted in the auditor’s analysis.
That said, as discussed in response to Finding 4, OPSB notes that the
premise of this Recommendation – namely, that OPSB as the control
agency for HR is responsible for ensuring that all payroll errors are
corrected in all SPMS agencies – could be broadly read to, and was
articulated in the exit meeting to, seek to have OPSB follow up with
each agency on each error of this type and continue to follow up
regularly on each error until it is resolved, including escalating to agency
leadership as often as needed to ensure they are resolved. By requiring
OPSB follow up without limitation until every error of this type is
corrected, this recommendation makes OPSB responsible for the
accuracy of every such transaction in the SPMS.
OPSB believes that this outcome would be cost inefficient for the State
and respectfully disagrees that this is OPSB’s proper responsibility. It is
the agency’s responsibility to process employee terminations in a timely
manner. When processing retro terminations, the agency should identify
when there are potential overpayments and immediately take action to
investigate and follow up. Overpayments are drawn from individual
agency budgets and thus the responsibility of that individual agency to
collect that debt. If they are unable to collect themselves, agencies are
the sole entity able to refer the debt to the Central Collections Unit as
defined in COMAR 17.01.01.04. Responsibility for individual HR
transactions of this nature has been distributed to individual agencies and
does not rest with OPSB.
Though OSPB will provide additional training and guidance documents
as necessary to emphasize this responsibility and the steps agencies
should be taking when processing such transactions in Workday, the
SPMS has delegated HR functions and agency HR staff do not have any
reporting relationship to OPSB and each agency’s individual
responsibility and authority is not altered by OPSB’s provision of tools
to assist agency execution.
Auditor’s Comment: While it appears as though OPSB agrees to implement the
recommendation, it continues to disagree that it is primarily responsible for this
oversight function. As previously noted in the auditor’s comment to Finding 4,
we continue to believe that due to its statutory responsibility and primary
authority over SPMS, ensuring the overall accuracy of employee payments after
separation from State employment falls under OPSB authority.
Page 16 of 23

--- Page 49 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
Finding 6
OPSB did not have a comprehensive process to monitor and provide
guidance to address employees with significant overtime including 775
employees we identified whose overtime earnings consistently exceeded their
regular base salary.
We recommend that OPSB develop and implement comprehensive policies
and procedures for overtime usage in consultation with SPMS agencies and
other DBM units. Specifically, we recommend that these procedures and
policies include
a. routinely performing data analysis to identify employees with potentially
excessive overtime (repeat);
b. requiring documented justifications from the respective agencies for
employees earning excessive overtime and corrective action plans from
the agencies to reduce overtime payments in the future (repeat);
c. ensuring that agencies establish appropriate agency-based policies for
managing and controlling overtime, and providing guidance as to the
basic requirements such policies should include (repeat); and
d. working in conjunction with the appropriate DBM units, including those
with budgetary authority, to address agencies with consistently excessive
overtime (such as adding additional positions) (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Additional Comments
Please provide Earning overtime while also using paid leave (Additional Comment)
additional comments as The Analysis states that earning of overtime while using paid leave
deemed necessary. could be indicative of abusive overtime usage. However, COMAR
17.04.11.02 establishes the State’s policy that the use of paid leave is
considered work time that counts toward the calculation of overtime, and
OPSB is required to uphold that policy. Developing oversight
procedures to question when leave and overtime occur in the same pay
period is not consistent with COMAR 17.04.11.02 and could be
considered to impinge on employee rights to take paid leave they have
earned.
Analysis of earning excessive overtime (Additional Comment)
Page 17 of 23

--- Page 50 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
OPSB fully endorses the interest of the State to reduce overtime usage
and agrees that high levels of overtime are likely cost-ineffective for the
State. However, overtime usage is overwhelmingly concentrated in a
handful of agencies with significant 24/7 facilities, often with mandatory
staffing levels. The foundational issue driving overtime in these agencies
is overall staffing levels and associated difficulties recruiting and
retaining sufficient staff. Given this environment, overtime is often
necessary to staff facilities adequately and as required by statute or State
policy. While improved scheduling or distributing overtime away from
those identified as having “excessive” overtime in this audit may yield
marginal improvements (e.g. if necessary overtime goes to less tenured
and so less expensive staff), it will not address the core issues driving
overtime. As such, though useful to capture these marginal
improvements, it is important to note that OPSB does not anticipate the
recommendations will result in significant reductions in overall overtime
costs.
Process to monitor and provide guidance to manage overtime
(Additional Comment)
In addition, the Analysis states that OPSB did not have a comprehensive
process to monitor and provide guidance to agencies to manage and
address employees with significant overtime. Subsequently, a report to
capture the percentage of overtime an employee has earned in relation to
their bi-weekly salary has been developed and OPSB started distributing
it to each Agency effective 9/2/2025.
The Analysis should also note that OPSB has no authority to approve or
disapprove an employee’s overtime outside of DBM. COMAR
17.04.11.02 C (1) and (2) address the responsibility of the Agency and
who must be made aware of any employee who works overtime each
pay period.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2025
Please provide details of As of September 2025, OPSB sends out a comprehensive report that
corrective action or identifies all employees earning overtime within the Agency and
explain disagreement. provides guidance to review and address excessive overtime.
Though OPSB has no authority to approve or disapprove an employee’s
overtime outside of DBM, OPSB will also provide more impactful
verbiage in the report email body to elaborate on the requirement
(pending bargaining) of each Agency to establish a policy for overtime
and to ensure the appropriate documents are completed or approvals
made in Workday to support the approved status of the overtime worked.
Page 18 of 23

--- Page 51 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 6b Agree in part Estimated Completion Date: December 2027
Please provide details of It is the responsibility of each agency to authorize and manage overtime
corrective action or and to determine what is considered “excessive” based on operational
explain disagreement. need.
That said, OPSB will require acknowledgment by each SPMS Agency at
least semi-annually that they are adhering to their agency’s Overtime
Policy (see below). OPSB has no authority to take remedial action to any
agency outside of DBM but can and will provide guidance and reporting
tools.
The estimated completion date of December 2027 accounts for the
potential need for agencies to develop or update their overtime policies.
As noted in the response to Recommendation 6c, such actions may
require bargaining with union representatives, which, based on past
experience, can be a lengthy process.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2027
Please provide details of While a single State-wide overtime policy is not feasible given the
corrective action or diversity of operational requirements, OPSB agrees that, as appropriate,
explain disagreement. relevant SPMS Agencies should have a policy in place governing the use
of overtime based on operational requirements of the Agency.
To that end, OPSB will seek to require SPMS agencies with significant
overtime usage to develop their own Overtime Policy (where not
currently in existence) and share that Policy with OPSB. The ability to
create an agency Overtime Policy or to update an existing agency
Overtime Policy is subject to bargaining with exclusive representatives.
As applicable, OPSB will provide agencies with guidelines for drafting
an overtime policy which will include specific laws, regulations, and
MOU provisions that govern the use, payment, authorization, and
recording of overtime in addition to best practices in the management of
overtime.
The estimated completion date of December 2027 accounts for the time
needed to bargain and negotiate with union representatives on the
development or update of agency Overtime Policies.
Recommendation 6d Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2026
Page 19 of 23

--- Page 52 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DBM OBA already does review agency overtime spending as part of the
corrective action or budget process each year. This results in discussions with those
explain disagreement. agencies that have significant overtime expenditures. To enhance this
process, OPSB will partner with OBA, by providing information and
better communication, to support those efforts that assist agencies in
better managing overtime costs.
Auditor’s Comment: OPSB indicates that it agrees to implement all
recommendations, however, it notes that the identification of “excessive”
overtime may yield marginal improvements due to the factors driving the usage of
overtime in select agencies. However, OPSB did not provide support for these
assertions. Regardless, we continue to believe that OPSB should monitor
statewide overtime to help ensure that abusive overtime practices are identified
and addressed timely by the respective agencies.
Page 20 of 23

--- Page 53 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Healthcare Plan Administrator Contracts
Finding 7
OPSB’s contracts with two plan administrators did not specify the consumer
price index (CPI) to be used to calculate administrative fees resulting in
OPSB paying between $3.3 million and $6.6 million more in administrative
fees over the term of the contracts.
We recommend that OPSB ensure its plan administrator contracts specify
the category and month’s CPI to be used for calculating the administrative
fee, and that the plan administrators adhere to these requirements.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Recommendation 7 Agree in part Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of OPSB agrees that it should specify the CPI category to be used and, as
corrective action or noted, has included in the RFP for its new plan administrator contract
explain disagreement. that the administrative fee would be based on a 12-month rolling average
available by May 31st, as a set, specific month agreed upon with the
Contract Manager, for subsequent calendar years. Additionally, the
language states that the lowest factor would be applied when comparing
medical to overall CPI-U averages.
Given the reasons noted below, it would not be good business practice to
identify a specific month for determining CPI in our RFP language.
Identifying a specific month that the plan administrator must use for
calculating CPI disrupts the underwriting process. It is standard practice
to project costs as close to the effective date as possible to eliminate
additional trend, which is calculated on a compounded monthly basis.
A rolling 12-month average provides for better business planning and
rate stability for the following reasons:
● Underwriting Accuracy: Insurance underwriting relies on
accurately forecasting future costs (claims, administrative costs,
changes in the market). A volatile, single-month CPI makes this
forecasting less reliable. The smoother rolling average allows
underwriters to build more confident and stable predictions into
their premium calculations.
Page 21 of 23

--- Page 54 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
● Avoiding "Stair-Step" Changes: Relying on a single, possibly
extreme, month can lead to sharp, unpredictable "stair-step"
increases or decreases in premiums when the policy renews. The
rolling average promotes a more gradual and predictable
adjustment of administrative fees and premiums over time, which
is better for both the insurer and the policyholder.
In essence, while the single-month, year-over-year CPI change
(CPIMonth 12/CPIMonth 0) is a good measure of the most recent 12-
month change, the rolling 12-month average (comparing the average of
the last 12 months to the average of the previous 12 months) is often
considered a better measure of the sustained inflation environment that
affects the costs associated with insurance risk.
Page 22 of 23

--- Page 55 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 8 and 9 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DBM’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, DBM’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 23 of 23

--- Page 56 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Managers
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Dorian A. Fournier, CIA
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditors
Charles O. Price
Information System Senior Auditor
Matthew K. Gonglewski
Jacob M. Kasten
Jessica G. McRobie
Nga T. Nguyen Simmons
Staff Auditors
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditor