Title: Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration – Managed Care Program
Date: 2026-01-14
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=696971916e625f71a2546633
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:10:31.753849
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
January 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 14, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Medical Care Programs Administration’s (MCPA) fiscal
activities with respect to the Managed Care Program (known as HealthChoice) for
the period beginning April 1, 2022 to May 15, 2025. Under HealthChoice,
MCPA makes monthly capitation payments to private Managed Care
Organizations (MCOs) to cover the cost of services provided to Medicaid
recipients. During calendar year 2024, MCPA paid providers approximately
$7.59 billion for HealthChoice services, which was financed by State and federal
funds.
Our audit disclosed that MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure
that ineligible payments reported by the MCOs, such as denied claims, were
excluded from the capitation rate calculation. The inclusion of such payments in
the expenditure data used to calculate the MCO capitation rates could result in the
rates being set too high. For example, MCPA did not ensure that 124,500
duplicate claims totaling $287 million were excluded from the capitation rate
calculation. Similar conditions were noted in our prior audit report and in our
June 23, 2020 performance audit report of MDH’s Efforts to Identify and Analyze
Improper Medicaid Payments but were not sufficiently corrected.
Our audit also disclosed that MCPA did not have an effective process to identify
and prevent capitation payments to MCOs for incarcerated individuals, whose
healthcare costs are generally covered by the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS) instead of MCPA. Our match of DPSCS
incarceration records for the period between July 2017 and March 2025 to MCO

--- Page 4 ---
HealthChoice enrollees identified 2,452 individuals who were enrolled in
HealthChoice while incarcerated, resulting in $7.8 million in improper capitation
payments. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report
and aforementioned performance audit report but not sufficiently corrected.
Our audit further disclosed that MCPA did not investigate or recover potentially
improper supplemental payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries. Specifically,
as of September 2025, MCPA had not investigated 768 potentially unsupported
supplemental newborn delivery payments made during calendar years 2022 and
2023 totaling $13.8 million to determine if the payments were legitimate or
should be recovered from the MCOs. In response to our request, MCPA
investigated 20 of these claims totaling $352,000 and determined that 5 claims
totaling $88,900 were improperly paid. This condition was commented upon in
our preceding audit report but not corrected.
Finally, our audit disclosed that MCPA did not ensure that payments made to a
State university were adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the
tasks performed, and in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of MCPA, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and
related recommendations and will notify MCPA of any needed clarification to
ensure the responses sufficiently address the related findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MCPA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Capitation Rates
* Finding 1 – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not 8
have comprehensive procedures to ensure that ineligible costs
reported by the MCOs were excluded from the capitation rate
calculation.
Improper Medicaid Payments
* Finding 2 – MCPA did not have an effective process to identify capitation 11
payments to MCOs for incarcerated individuals, resulting in improper
payments totaling $7.8 million.
MCO Supplemental Payments
* Finding 3 – MCPA did not investigation and recover $13.8 million in 12
potentially improper supplemental payments to MCOs for newborn
deliveries.
Interagency Agreement
Finding 4 – MCPA did not ensure that payments made to a State university 13
were adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks
performed, and in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 18
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of
November 2025
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA) administers Medicaid, a joint federal and state
entitlement program for low-income individuals. MCPA’s Managed Care
Program, known as HealthChoice uses nine private Managed Care Organizations
(MCOs) to provide medical services to Maryland Medicaid recipients. In general,
MCOs contract with and pay health care professionals and other entities (such as
hospitals) to provide these services.
According to MCPA records for fiscal year 2025, approximately $6.8 billion of
the $13.9 billion in State Medicaid expenditures related to MCOs that provided
services to 1.1 million of the 1.3 million Maryland Medicaid recipients as of June
30, 2025 (see Figure 1). During the audit period there was a decrease in Medicaid
recipients due primarily to the end of the COVID-era continuous enrollment
policy and resumption of normal eligibility reviews, which resulted in many
recipients being disenrolled because they no longer met eligibility requirements.
MCPA makes a monthly capitation payment for each Medicaid recipient enrolled
in the MCO. The capitation rates vary by recipient based on several factors,
including the recipient’s demographics and medical history. MCPA also
reimburses the MCOs for certain high-cost activities (such as newborn deliveries).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
MCPA Medicaid Expenditures and Recipients
(Fiscal Years 2018 to 2025)
Source: State accounting records, MCPA records
The scope of this audit included MCPA’s monitoring of enrollment and
disenrollment of recipients in MCOs, calculations of the MCO capitation rates,
and MCO oversight and processing of the related payments. Separate audits are
conducted of MCPA’s primary functions (such as recipient eligibility, long-term
care, and hospital services), of MCPA’s monitoring of the Behavioral Health
5

--- Page 8 ---
Administration’s Administrative Service Organization, of MCPA’s Pharmacy
Services, and the recovery of the federal share of Medicaid program costs, which
is included in our audit of MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units (see
Exhibit 1 on page 18).
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated December 14, 2023. See Figure 2 for the
results of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MCPA procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive to
Finding 1 ensure the validity of MCO reported expenditure data used Not Repeated
in the capitation rate setting calculation.
MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure
Repeated
Finding 2 that ineligible costs reported by the MCOs were excluded
(Current Finding 1)
from the capitation rate calculation.
MCPA did not have an effective process to identify
capitation payments to MCOs for incarcerated individuals, Repeated
Finding 3
resulting in approximately $14 million in improper (Current Finding 2)
payments during fiscal years 2019 to 2022.
MCPA did not investigate and recover potentially improper
Repeated
Finding 4 supplemental payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries
(Current Finding 3)
totaling $10.4 million.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Capitation Rates
Background
According to Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II) records, the
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) made payments to the Managed
Care Organizations (MCOs) totaling approximately $7.59 billion during calendar
year 2024, which were financed by State and federal funds. Capitation payments
accounted for $7 billion (92 percent) of this amount, and the remaining $589.4
million was for supplemental payments made to MCOs for certain high cost
services (such as newborn deliveries).
The capitation rates are calculated on a calendar year basis, using the MCOs’
reported expenditures for the year that is three years prior to the year for which
rates are being calculated, and vary by recipient depending on the assigned
capitation rate category. Our review focused primarily on MCPA’s calculation of
the calendar year 2024 capitation rates, which was performed using MCO
expenditures during calendar year 2021. MCPA contracts with an independent
accounting firm to verify the MCO-reported expenditures and has an interagency
agreement with a State university to assist with the rate-setting calculation (see
Figure 3). These calculations are certified by an actuary and then submitted to the
federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for approval.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 3
Capitation Rate Calculation Overview
• MCOs report expenditures (for year that is three years prior to
year for which rates are being calculated) to MCPA.
Step 1
• MCPA uses an independent accounting firm to validate the
MCO-reported expenditures.
Step 2
• The State university adjusts the validated MCO-reported
expenditure data and works with an actuary to calculate and
Capitation Rate Calculation Overview
Step 3 certify the capitation rates.
• MCPA submits the capitation rates to CMS for approval.
Step 4
Each recipient is placed in one of 67 capitation categories based on factors such as
age, demographics, and historical medical services provided. For example, for
calendar year 2024, the monthly capitation rates paid for adults without children
in Baltimore City ranged from $259 to $2,775 per recipient.
Finding 1
MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that ineligible costs
reported by the MCOs were excluded from the capitation rate calculation.
Analysis
MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that ineligible costs
reported by the MCOs were excluded from the capitation rate calculation. Claims
which should be excluded from the capitation rate calculation include denied
claims and claims which were not the responsibility of the MCO, such as, claims
for carved out services.1 The inclusion of such payments in the expenditure data
1 MCPA, rather than the MCO, is responsible for paying claims for carved-out services, such as
certain behavioral health services.
8

--- Page 11 ---
used to calculate the capitation rates could result in MCO capitation rates being
set too high.
Denied Claims Were Not Investigated
MCPA did not ensure that the MCO-reported expenditure data, used in the rate-
setting calculation, excluded claims that were subsequently determined to be
improper. The MCOs record expenditure data in MCPA’s Medicaid Management
Information System (MMIS II), which contains numerous automated edits to
identify potential improprieties (such as duplicate claims) for further investigation
by MCPA. MCPA did not review
Figure 4
these denied claims to verify if they
Denied MCO Claims in MMIS II
were improper and determine if the
by Calendar Year
related ineligible costs were
excluded from the expenditure data Claims Amount
Calendar
submitted by the MCOs for Denied by Reported Paid
Year
capitation rate-setting purposes. MMIS II by MCO
Rather, the denied claims were
2022 4,602 $ 17,088,705
forwarded by MCPA to the MCOs
2023 136,395 89,005,336
for further investigation without
additional follow up by MCPA to 2024 666,168 324,621,813
determine the resolution. Total 807,165 $430,715,854
Source: MCPA records
Our analysis of MMIS II records
disclosed approximately 807,000 claims
totaling $430.7 million reported by the MCOs between calendar year 2022 and
2024 that were denied by MMIS II (see Figure 4). A significant portion of these
claims appeared questionable based on the stated reason the claim was denied by
MMIS II. For example, 124,500 claims totaling $287 million were denied
because they were duplicates of previously submitted claims, including $203.8
million in calendar year 2024.2
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. MDH’s
response to our prior report, on behalf of MCPA, indicated that MCPA would
review denied claims to ensure improper payments are excluded from expenditure
data used in the capitation rate calculation by March 2024. However, MCPA had
not performed any such reviews as of October 2025.
Improper Payments for Carved Out Services
MCPA did not have procedures to ensure that claims for carved out services were
excluded from the capitation rate calculation, resulting in potentially duplicate
2 MCPA could not readily explain why the number of denied claims significantly varied in these
years.
9

--- Page 12 ---
claims totaling $8 million paid between May 2022 and December 2024 going
undetected. MCPA’s contracts with the nine MCOs exclude carved out services
(such as certain behavioral health services), which are covered directly by MCPA
as fee-for-service claims.
We matched3 fee-for-service claims for carved out services paid by MCPA to
health care providers to MCO claims data during the aforementioned period. Our
match identified 33,115 potential duplicate claims totaling $8 million paid by
MCPA and an MCO to a provider for the same service,4 including 24,074 claims
totaling $5.4 million for behavioral health services. At our request, MCPA
investigated 22 of these claims totaling $350,600 and determined that all 22
claims were paid by both MCPA and the MCO including 21 claims totaling
$346,900 improperly paid by the MCOs. The remaining claim was improperly
paid by the Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services.5
The claims improperly paid by the MCO would have been included in the
capitation calculation.
A similar condition was commented upon in our performance audit report on
MDH’s Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments dated June
23, 2020, and our preceding audit report dated December 14, 2023. MDH’s
response to our prior report on behalf of MCPA indicated that MCPA would
implement a data match to ensure the MCOs were not paying for carved out
services by June 2024. In October 2024 a State university began performing a
data match to identify payments by MCOs for carved out services. However, as
of September 2025, MCPA did not investigate the claims identified by the State
university or implement any procedures to ensure that claims improperly paid by
the MCO were excluded from the capitation rate calculation.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCPA
a. review claims denied by MMIS II and ensure improper payments are
excluded from the expenditure data used in the capitation rate calculation
(repeat);
b. use available MCO data to ensure duplicate payments are not made for
services that are carved out from the MCO contracts (repeat); and
3 Our match was based on a fee-for-service claim having the same date of service, recipient,
diagnosis, provider, and claim charge as the claim data reported by the MCO.
4 The MCO would have been compensated for the direct provider payment through the capitation
payments made by MCPA.
5 These payments are within the scope of our separate audit of MCPA’s Administrative Service
Organization for Behavioral Health Services.
10

--- Page 13 ---
c. take corrective action to address carved out service claims that were
improperly paid, including the claims mentioned above (repeat).
Improper Medicaid Payments
Finding 2
MCPA did not have an effective process to identify capitation payments to
MCOs for incarcerated individuals, resulting in improper payments totaling
$7.8 million.
Analysis
MCPA did not have an effective process to identify capitation payments to MCOs
for incarcerated individuals, resulting in improper capitation payments totaling
$7.8 million. State regulations provide that incarcerated individuals are not
eligible for the HealthChoice program since the cost of their healthcare is
generally paid by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS).6
Although MCPA performed a weekly match of MCO enrollment data to
incarceration data obtained from DPSCS to identify incarcerated individuals for
removal, this match did not identify all incarcerated individuals. Specifically, our
Data Analytics Unit independently obtained incarceration records from DPSCS7
and matched this data to MCO enrollees as of December 2024 which identified
2,452 incarcerated individuals who were enrolled in MCOs, resulting in $7.8
million in improper capitation payments. MCPA could not readily explain why
its match did not identify these individuals.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report and in our
June 23, 2020 performance audit report of MDH’s Efforts to Identify and Analyze
Improper Medicaid Payments. MDH’s response to our prior report indicated that
MCPA would ensure incarcerated individuals are timely disenrolled from MCOs
by March 2024. However, during our current audit MCPA advised that it had not
6 Under federal and State regulations, incarcerated individuals are allowed to maintain Medicaid
eligibility during periods of incarceration but are required to be disenrolled from the Managed
Care Program (HealthChoice). Typically, Medicaid only covers certain fee-for-service claims
(such as inpatient hospital care) for incarcerated individuals and payments for ineligible services
should be prevented.
7 The data we obtained from DPSCS covered the period between July 2017 and March 2025 and
included the periods of incarceration based on dates of inmate intake, transfer, and release. We
determined that the incarceration records we received from DPSCS were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes of our matches.
11

--- Page 14 ---
made any changes to its match methodology. Consequently, MCPA did not
identify and timely disenroll the aforementioned 2,452 individuals, including 508
individuals who were also identified in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA ensure incarcerated individuals are timely
disenrolled from MCOs to prevent improper capitation payments (repeat).
MCO Supplemental Payments
Finding 3
MCPA did not investigate and recover $13.8 million in potentially improper
supplemental payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries.
Analysis
MCPA did not investigate and recover potentially improper supplemental
payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries. MCOs submit supplemental newborn
delivery claims directly into MMIS II that are not verified by MCPA prior to
payment. According to MCPA records, during calendar years 2022 through 2024,
MCOs were paid for approximately 77,800 supplemental claims totaling $1.42
billion, of which $1.31 billion (92 percent) were for newborn delivery claims.
During calendar year 2024, supplemental payments for each newborn delivery
ranged from $14,727 to $21,008 depending on the geographic location.
MCPA relied on a State university to identify supplemental newborn delivery
claims that did not have a corresponding hospital record. As of September 2025,
MCPA had not reviewed any of the 768 potentially unsupported claims totaling
$13.8 million identified by the State university for calendar years 2022 and 2023
to determine if the payments were legitimate or should be recovered from the
MCOs.8 MCPA management advised that the claims were not investigated due to
staffing shortages.
At our request, MCPA investigated 20 claims totaling $352,000 and determined
that 5 claims totaling $88,900 were improperly paid. MCPA advised that it plans
to recover these funds from the MCOs. For example, for one claim totaling
$16,500, the MCO could not document a newborn delivery with a corresponding
hospital record.
8 As of October 2025, MCPA’s State university had not reported supplemental newborn delivery
claims paid during calendar year 2024.
12

--- Page 15 ---
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. MDH’s
response to that report on behalf of MCPA indicated that MCPA would
investigate the propriety of all potentially improper newborn delivery
supplemental claims by January 2024 and retract any unsupported payments from
the MCOs. As noted above MCPA did not investigate potentially improper
claims identified during the audit period and, as of October 2025, MCPA had not
investigated 605 of the 625 potentially improper claims identified in our prior
audit.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA
a. investigate the propriety of all potentially improper newborn delivery
supplemental claims (repeat); and
b. recover any amounts paid for improper claims, including those noted
above (repeat).
Interagency Agreement
Finding 4
MCPA did not ensure that payments made to a State university were
adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed,
and in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university were
adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed, and in
accordance with the terms of the agreement. MCPA has a longstanding
interagency agreement9 with a State university to assist with the capitation rate-
setting process and to assign each MCO enrollee to a specific capitation category.
According to State records, payments under the agreement between July 2023 and
May 2025 totaled $18.7 million. The agreement identified the university
employees who would perform the work and their salaries (including fringe
benefits), and the percentage of each employee’s time to be applied to work under
the agreement.
MCPA did not obtain sufficient records to verify amounts invoiced. Specifically,
our test of 12 invoices paid between July 2022 and April 2025 totaling $8.9
million (including $5.6 million for direct labor charges), disclosed MCPA did not
obtain details of the actual time spent by each employee on MCPA projects. In
addition, MCPA did not obtain support for charges totaling $1.4 million for
9 MCPA’s most recent interagency agreement covers the period between July 2024 and June 2029
totaling $83 million.
13

--- Page 16 ---
subcontractor charges and other direct costs invoiced by the State university. As a
result, MCPA could not verify the propriety of the salary charges and the
reasonableness in relation to the tasks performed.
In this regard, our review of the support for these invoices disclosed that MCPA
paid $73,000 for 8 individuals who were not included in the agreement. While
MCPA management advised us that it received verbal notice from the university
of all personnel changes, MCPA could not document that it had approved these
individuals and the agreement did not address a process for approving personnel
changes or additions.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA
a. implement a process to ensure the propriety of State university invoices.
For example, obtain and review payroll records or restructure the
agreement to base payment on specific deliverables to be monitored by
MCPA, or a combination thereof; and
b. ensure all staffing changes are documented and approved.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) for the period
beginning April 1, 2022 and ending May 15, 2025. The audit scope for this audit
included MCPA’s fiscal activities with respect to the Managed Care Program
(HealthChoice) and excluded the procedures and controls over MCPA’s primary
functions, the Behavioral Health Administration’s Administrative Service
Organization, and the Maryland Pharmacy Program, which are reviewed under
three separate audits (as further explained in the Background Information section
of this report).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCPA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included MCPA’s monitoring of the services provided by
its Managed Care Organizations (MCOs), enrollment and disenrollment of
Medicaid recipients in MCOs, payments to MCOs (including MCPA’s capitation
rate-setting process), and the capitation rate-setting interagency agreement. We
also determined the status of the four findings contained in our preceding audit
report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA by MDH’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other
Units. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls
over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
and programs and an assessment of MCPA’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
15

--- Page 18 ---
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
MCPA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 1, 2022 to May 15, 2025, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MCPA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
We also extracted data from the Medicaid Management Information System (such
as MCPA and MCO claim payments) for the purpose of selecting test items and
performing data analytics. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MCPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
16

--- Page 19 ---
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MCPA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCPA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of November 2025 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
Behavioral Health
Administration and Medical • Behavioral Health Administration
Care Programs Administration • Medical Care Programs Administration
1 10/03/25
- Administrative Service Administrative Service Organization for
Organization for Behavioral Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
• John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institute for Children
Children and Adolescents
2 and 08/25/25
• Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents
Adolescents – Baltimore
Developmental Disabilities
3 Developmental Disabilities Administration 06/18/25
Administration
• 22 Health Professional Boards and
4 Regulatory Services Commissions 04/09/25
• The Office of Health Care Quality
5 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 03/19/25
• Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
Prevention and Health
• Office of Population Health
Promotion Administration -
Improvement
Office of
• Office of Preparedness and Response
Population Health
6 • Office of Provider Engagement and 08/09/24
Improvement -
Regulation – Office of Controlled
Office of Preparedness and
Substances Administration
Response - Office of Provider
• Office of Provider Engagement and
Engagement and Regulation
Regulation – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
7 Pharmacy Services Pharmacy Services 08/09/24
8 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
• Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
• Eastern Shore Hospital Center
State Psychiatric Hospital
9 • Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
Centers
• Springfield Hospital Center
• Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of December 2025 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
• Maryland Health Care Commission
• Health Services Cost Review
Health Regulatory
10 Commission 01/25/24
Commission
• Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
Medical Care Programs
11 • Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/23
Administration
• Office of the Secretary
• Deputy Secretary and Executive
Director for Behavioral Health
• Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and
12 Disabilities 10/19/23
Other Units
• Deputy Secretary for Public Health
• Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating Officer
• Deputy Secretary for Operations
• Deer’s Head Center
13 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
• Western Maryland Hospital Center
• Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities • Potomac Center
14 10/24/22
Residential Centers • Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
Office of the Chief Medical
15 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
Examiner
19

--- Page 22 ---
APPENDIX
January 14, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of
Health – Medical Care Programs Administration – Managed Care Program for the period
beginning April 1, 2022 and ending May 15, 2025.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Meena Seshamani, M.D., Ph.D.
Secretary
cc: Kate Wolff, MPA, Chief of Staff, MDH
Emily Berg, JD, MPH, Deputy Chief of Staff
Perrie Briskin, Deputy Secretary for Health Care Finance
Liz Schuelke, Chief of Staff
Rayva Virginkar, Medicaid Deputy Director
Clint Hackett, Deputy Secretary for Operations
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &amp; Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance
& Information Security, MDH

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
Capitation Rates
Finding 1
MCPA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that ineligible costs
reported by the MCOs were excluded from the capitation rate calculation.
We recommend that MCPA
a. review claims denied by MMIS II and ensure improper payments are
excluded from the expenditure data used in the capitation rate calculation
(repeat);
b. use available MCO data to ensure duplicate payments are not made for
services that are carved out from the MCO contracts (repeat); and
c. take corrective action to address carved out service claims that were
improperly paid, including the claims mentioned above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/27
Please provide details of MDH continues to make progress in developing the recommended
corrective action or procedures. For example, one vendor reviews dental encounters and
explain disagreement. behavior health encounters (carved out services) to ensure excluded in
Managed Care Organization (MCO) encounters. Beginning with CY
2023, instructions require the MCOs to remove incarcerated individuals,
dental, and behavioral health services from the MCO HealthChoice
Financial Monitoring Report (HFMR) reporting submissions, which are
used for the MCO rate calculations. Additionally, ongoing vendor audits
incorporate procedures to test denied and zero pay encounters in the
CY2023 and CY2024 procedures. Feedback was provided from our
vendor to the MCOs, and encounter data quality is reviewed as part of
the MCPA led quarterly encounter data workgroup meeting. For
CY2025, the vendor will audit for denied claims and adjustments to
exclude denied claims will be made for CY2025 dates of service used
for rate setting. MDH will review this work as part of the regular
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
meetings with the vendor. The audit is expected to be completed by
April 2027. MDH will update the SOP to reflect these procedures.
The MDH Office of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security (IAC/S) will begin testing existing procedures during CY2026
and will validate final procedures by June 30, 2027.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of MDH has developed an internal review of paid claims and accepted
corrective action or encounters on an ongoing basis, beginning with services provided in CY
explain disagreement. 2020 and CY 2021, to detect duplicate payments, determine the accurate
responsible payor, and instruct the payor reimbursing the duplicate
payment to recoup funds from the provider. A vendor produces an
annual report identifying duplicate payments to providers by matching
MCO encounters and Administrative Service Organization (ASO) claims
based on the provider, recipient, and date of service. Thus far, the
analysis has been limited to a set of diagnosis, revenue, and medical bed
codes associated with the carve-out. MDH has recruited a new Coding
and Compliance Specialist to complete this effort by June 30, 2026.
IAC/S will validate the process by December 31, 2026.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of The duplicate claims identified in the report described in the response to
corrective action or Recommendation b will first be organized and reviewed by provider
explain disagreement. type and diagnosis code to determine the responsible payor. Once the
responsible payor is identified, MDH will contact the MCOs and
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) to instruct them to recoup
payment from the provider for claims that were incorrectly paid by either
entity. The entity reimbursing for the duplicate claim will then be
required to provide proof they paid the claim identified and evidence of
recoupment to MDH. This reconciliation and recoupment will take place
on a quarterly basis.
IAC/S will validate this process by December 31, 2026.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
Improper Medicaid Payments
Finding 2
MCPA did not have an effective process to identify capitation payments to
MCOs for incarcerated individuals, resulting in improper payments totaling
$7.8 million.
We recommend that MCPA ensure incarcerated individuals are timely
disenrolled from MCOs to prevent improper capitation payments (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of To facilitate the most comprehensive match process, MCPA has engaged
corrective action or in several discussions with DPSCS following the previous audit to
explain disagreement. address file integrity, ensuring that the most precise and complete
incarceration data is supplied, thereby allowing for the identification of
all incarcerated recipients. Further, our efforts include incorporating the
daily JAIL inmate roster file into the existing PRISON inmate roster file
process which occurred in March 2025. This strategy enhances MCPA's
capacity to broaden the inmate dataset, thereby capturing complete
incarceration data and improving MCPA's capability to conduct a more
expansive comparison with the Medicaid eligibility database. Our most
recent meeting with DPSCS occurred in December 2025.
Based on the meetings held to date, MCPA is optimistic that future
incarceration records sent from DPSCS to MDH will allow for more
timely and accurate identification of incarcerated recipients that should
be removed from MCO thus avoiding erroneous capitation payments.
IAC/S will validate the corrective actions during the fourth quarter of
CY 2026.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
MCO Supplemental Payments
Finding 3
MCPA did not investigate and recover $13.8 million in potentially improper
supplemental payments to MCOs for newborn deliveries.
We recommend that MCPA
a. investigate the propriety of all potentially improper newborn delivery
supplemental claims (repeat); and
b. recover any amounts paid for improper claims, including those noted
above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of MDH has successfully reviewed CY2021 claims. For CY2021, there
corrective action or were a total of 23,669 newborn supplemental payment claims. A vendor
explain disagreement. validated 98.8% (23,393) of the newborn supplemental payment claims
using encounter data and enrollment data, and 1.2% (276) of the claims
were unable to be validated by encounter and enrollment data. Based
on documentation MCOs provided, only 24 claims required retraction,
totaling $363,832.55 in recoupments.
The vendor has now completed validation reviews for CY2022 (98.7%
validated), CY2023 (98%), and CY2024 (98.6%). MDH anticipates
completing reviews of 817 (204 from CY 2022, 316 from CY2023, and
297 from CY2024) unvalidated deliveries by Q1 CY2026.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of After the process outlined above, MDH identifies deliveries that could
corrective action or not be verified by the MCOs based on the documentation they provided.
explain disagreement. MDH retracts the newborn supplemental kick payments from the MCO.
MDH anticipates completing the review and necessary retracted
payments for CY2021 - CY2024 by the end of Q1 CY2026.
IAC/S will review the validations and collections by 12/31/2026.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
Interagency Agreement
Finding 4
MCPA did not ensure that payments made to a State university were
adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed,
and in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
We recommend that MCPA
a. implement a process to ensure the propriety of State university invoices.
For example, obtain and review payroll records or restructure the
agreement to base payment on specific deliverables to be monitored by
MCPA, or a combination thereof; and
b. ensure all staffing changes are documented and approved.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/26
Please provide details of Enhanced Verification Process for Invoice Charges
corrective action or
MCPA agrees with the recommendation to continue strengthening its
explain disagreement.
invoice review process and provides additional information on the
enhanced verification process it has developed to address this finding
and remain in compliance with the terms of the agreement. These
enhancements are focused on (1) post-payment review and reconciliation
of payroll charges and effort to be completed twice annually based on
review of the report of effort, (2) review of contractor and subaward
costs, and (3) review of other direct costs. These changes have been
implemented for invoices received in FY26. With respect to (2) and (3),
the Department will randomly check expense invoices reported in the
grant summary reports (GSR) and grant detail reports (GDR) as part of
monitoring and verifying related expenses. Additionally, MDH will
request UMBC Hilltop to add entries in the monthly progress report to
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Managed Care Program
Agency Response Form
reflect the names of staff who were involved in the progress/delivery of
the project deliverables.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/26
Please provide details of MCPA is in the process of developing a Staffing Change form for the
corrective action or University to use for this purpose going forward. This Staffing Change
explain disagreement. Request Form will require the inclusion of the employee's name, title,
required skills and the employee’s expertise (documented in the
employee’s resume), and confirmation of their specific budgeted Full
Time Equivalent (FTE) effort percentage and amount. Requiring the
signature of the MCPA Contract Monitor prior to the start date will
formally ensure that all personnel changes are documented, approved,
and aligned with the contract's scope and budget before any associated
payroll expenses are incurred. The form is expected to be implemented
by March 2026.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 30 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Dianne P. Ramirez
Senior Auditor
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Matthew P. Henry
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditor