Title: Maryland State Department of Education
Date: 2026-01-16
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=69724d248933881e345fedc9
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:10:22.416080
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Department of Education
January 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 16, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Department
of Education (MSDE) for the period beginning June 1, 2021 and ending July 15,
2024. MSDE is responsible for setting statewide goals for school performance,
monitoring school achievement, and distributing financial aid. MSDE also
operates training programs and provides services to people with disabilities.
Our audit disclosed that MSDE did not have sufficient policies and procedures to
ensure employees hired by Local Education Agencies (LEAs) were properly
screened and did not have past disciplinary action precluding their employment.
In addition, MSDE did not ensure LEAs conducted required criminal background
checks, obtained and investigated all alerts of subsequent criminal activity, and
referred any disqualifying activity to MSDE. MSDE also did not monitor LEA
teacher assignment practices to ensure teachers held an appropriate license.
In addition, our audit disclosed that MSDE issued educator licenses without
sufficient independent review and approval to ensure licenses issued were proper.
Furthermore, MSDE did not verify the accuracy of the LEAs eligibility
determinations for prekindergarten students funded through Blueprint for
Maryland’s Future.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted these findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our

--- Page 4 ---
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit further disclosed that MSDE did not request federal fund
reimbursements timely, resulting in lost investment income totaling at least $3.6
million and could not provide documentation to support the propriety of accrued
federal fund revenue entries at the end of fiscal year 2024 or the subsequent
recovery of the funds.
Finally, we received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline related to
several contract awards and grants. Based on our review, we were able to
substantiate certain concerns raised in the allegations. For example, MSDE
awarded certain grants and contracts totaling $1.2 million without a competitive
process, and could not always support that deliverables were received. These
matters were referred to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division.
A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually
occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
MSDE’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MSDE’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings. In accordance with State law, we have
reviewed the response and, while MSDE generally agrees with the
recommendations in this report, we identified certain instances in which
statements in the response disagree or appear to be inconsistent with a report
finding and recommendation. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our
audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included
“auditor’s comments” within MSDE’s response to explain our position. We will
advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that
we cannot resolve with MSDE.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MSDE and its agreement to implement the audit recommendations.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Program (Blueprint) 6
Organizational Changes 8
Federal Funds for COVID-19 Grants 9
Referrals to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 12
Oversight of Local Education Agencies (LEAs)
Finding 1 – The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) 12
did not have sufficient policies and procedures to ensure employees
hired by LEAs were properly screened and did not have past
disciplinary action that precluded employment to work with
children.
Finding 2 – MSDE did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure 13
individuals with disqualifying criminal backgrounds were not
employed at LEAs.
Finding 3 – MSDE did not monitor LEA teacher assignment practices 14
to ensure teachers were assigned within their area of licensure, as
required.
Licensing
Finding 4 – MSDE did not independently review and approve all 15
initial applications for educator licenses and related support to
ensure the applicant met all required qualifications.
Blueprint Prekindergarten Funding
Finding 5 – MSDE did not verify the accuracy of LEAs’ eligibility 16
determinations for prekindergarten students funded through
Blueprint.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 17
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 17
Federal Funds
Finding 8 – MSDE did not request federal funds timely resulting in 17
lost investment income totaling at least $3.6 million.
Year-End Closing Entries
Finding 9 – MSDE could not provide documentation to support the 18
propriety of accrued federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent
recovery of the funds.
Technical Assistance Grants and Contracts
Finding 10 – MSDE awarded certain grants and contracts totaling 20
$1.2 million without a competitive process and could not always
support that the related deliverables were received.
21st Century Community Learning Centers Grants
Finding 11 – MSDE did not always process 21st Century Community 22
Learning Center grant reimbursement requests timely including 15
payments totaling approximately $389,000 that were paid between
106 and 332 days after receipt of the invoice.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 24
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), as the staff agency of the
State Board of Education, supports the development and operation of educational
programs throughout the State. MSDE is responsible for setting Statewide goals
for school performance, monitoring school achievement, and distributing financial
aid. MSDE also operates training programs and provides services to people with
disabilities. MSDE consists of the Headquarters and five other units or divisions.
This audit report includes the operation of the following units or divisions:
• Headquarters – Centralized business services including procurement,
accounts payable, corporate purchasing cards, grants management, human
resources, payroll, internal audits, and the Division of Rehabilitation
Services.
• Aid to Education – Formula funded grants, grants for Blueprint for
Maryland’s Future programs, and federal assistance for local education
agencies and other providers.
• Funding for Educational Organizations – Grants to the Maryland
School for the Blind, Blind Industries and Services of Maryland, and other
educational institutions (such as museums and theaters).
The remaining three units or divisions of MSDE (Division of Early Childhood,
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center, and the Maryland Center for School
Safety) are included within the scope of, and reported upon in, separate audit
reports.1 The support services these units or divisions receive from MSDE
Headquarters are subject to review and testing during this audit.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2024 MSDE’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $10.8 billion, of which $10.2 billion related to
Headquarters, Aid to Education, and Funding for Educational Organizations,
which are included in this audit (see Figure 1). This includes approximately $9
billion in State-funded Aid to Education, of which $7.7 billion are grants awarded
to local education agencies (such as Blueprint for Maryland’s Future). The
remaining $1.3 billion are comprised of payments for education-related costs
(such as the employer’s share of retirement costs for local school system
employees) and certain innovative programs.
1 The Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center and the Maryland Center for School Safety are
independent units of State government that have governing boards within MSDE.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
MSDE Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources2
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 943
Vacant 79
Total 1,022
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 131,356,273
Technical and Special Fees 53,929,561
Grants, Subsidies, and Contributions 9,874,209, 362
Other Operating Expenses 95,802,711
Total $10,155,297,907
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 7,269,433,378
Special Fund 1,504,729,848
Federal Fund 1,381,045,718
Reimbursable Fund 88,963
Total $10,155,297,907
Source: State financial and personnel records
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Program (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.3 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education system to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
2 This information is for only those MSDE units or Divisions under the current audit, specifically
Headquarters, Aid to Education, and Funding for Educational Organizations.
3 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty Aid, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides
additional funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as
Prekindergarten Aid).
As noted in Figure 2, State-funded Aid to Education expenditures increased $2.4
billion since fiscal year 2019 (increase from $6.6 billion in fiscal year 2019 to $9
billion in fiscal year 2024). The increase was primarily attributed to Blueprint
programs and initiatives. However, student enrollment in Maryland public
schools has decreased by 6,700 students (decrease from 896,837 students in fiscal
year 2019 to 890,137 students in fiscal year 2024). MSDE advised us that the
decrease in enrollment was primarily related to students being enrolled in
alternative schooling options during the COVID-19 public health crisis.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Enrollment and Aid to Education Expenditures by Source
Fiscal Years 2019 through 2024
(dollar amounts in billions)
909,414
896,837
882,538
889,971
881,471 890,137
$9.0
$8.0
$7.1 $7.3 $7.3
$6.6
$4.1
$2.1
$1.3 $1.5 $1.3
$1.0
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Enrollment State Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2024 included:
• $7.7 billion for State-funded Aid to Education (including the Blueprint for
Maryland’s Future programs)
• $745 million for the State-share of LEA employee pension costs
• $450 million for Early Childhood programs (including Prekindergarten)
• $109 million for Other State Funding
Source: State financial records and MSDE records
Organizational Changes
Effective July 1, 2022, Chapter 147, Laws of Maryland 2021, transferred the
Juvenile Services Education Program (JSEP) from MSDE to an independent unit
within the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS). Specifically, the fiscal
responsibilities and oversight of JSEP were transferred to a governing board and
superintendent within DJS. This audit includes JSEP activities through
8

--- Page 11 ---
July 1, 2022 and activity subsequent to this date has been included in our fiscal
compliance audit report of the Department of Juvenile Services dated May 1,
2025.
Effective July 1, 2023, Chapter 679, Laws of Maryland 2023, made the
Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) an independent unit of
State government instead of an independent commission within MSDE. As of
July 1, 2023, MSDE no longer provides support services to IAC (such as payroll,
maintenance of certain accounting records, and related fiscal functions). IAC
activity prior to August 1, 2022 was included in our separate audit report of IAC
dated March 14, 2023. This audit includes support services provided to IAC by
MSDE between August 1, 2022 through July 1, 2023 and activities subsequent to
this date will be included in the scope of our next audit of IAC.
Federal Funds for COVID-19 Grants
On March 28, 2025, the United States Department of Education (DOE) notified
every State that it was ending the liquidation period for COVID-19 grants4
effective immediately. MSDE management informed us that, as of April 2025, it
estimated a potential loss of at least $232 million in COVID-19 grants. This
includes approximately $127 million for amounts expended by MSDE, and $105
million for local education agency (LEA) expenditures that were not yet paid by
MSDE.5 Maryland and other states filed a lawsuit regarding these funds and in
May 2025, the U.S. District Court issued an injunction which was upheld in June
2025 by the U.S. Court of Appeals allowing Maryland to submit reimbursement
requests for these funds.
Referrals to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that MSDE
had executed contracts with specific vendors without performing a competitive
procurement or considering other qualified vendors in accordance with State
procurement regulations. Based on our review, we were able to substantiate
certain aspects of the allegations (see Finding 10), which we referred to the Office
of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division. A referral to the Criminal Division
4 Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) grants funded through the federal
Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act (ESSER II) and the
American Rescue Plan (ESSER III) provided funding to address the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on schools and students.
5 Typically, the LEAs expend funds related to these grants and submit support to MSDE for
payment. MSDE processes payments to the LEAs and subsequently submits requests for
reimbursement to DOE.
9

--- Page 12 ---
does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges
will be filed.
We also received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline containing
allegations regarding certain practices of MSDE’s Youth Development Branch
(YDB) office. This referral included allegations that MSDE has steered grant
evaluation activities to certain vendors, and delayed payments to grantees. We
conducted a review of the award and payment process for 21st Century
Community Learning Centers grants, which is the most significant grant under the
YDB. Based on our review, we were able to substantiate certain aspects of the
allegation (see Finding 11). However, the results of our review of this allegation
did not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 31, 2023. See Figure 3 for the results
of our review.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) did
not ensure local education agencies (LEAs) used Blueprint
Finding 1 Not repeated
for Maryland’s Future funds in accordance with the purposes
established by State law.
MSDE should consider establishing a monitoring process to
ensure LEAs implemented appropriate corrective actions to
Finding 2 Not repeated
address findings from our Office’s financial management
practices audit reports.
MSDE’s enrollment audits did not incorporate certain
Finding 3 procedures to ensure LEAs properly recorded and reported Not repeated
student attendance used to calculate State funding.
Finding 4 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.6 Status Redacted6
Finding 5 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.6 Status Redacted6
Finding 6 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.6 Status Redacted6
Finding 7 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.6 Status Redacted6
MSDE did not always verify the accuracy of expenditure
Finding 8 and performance data by grantees, and did not always Not repeated
conduct site visits of grantees.
MSDE did not always comply with State procurement
regulations including documenting bid openings, retaining
Finding 9 Not repeated
proposals, and publishing contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage.
6 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
has been redacted from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Oversight of Local Education Agencies (LEAs)
Finding 1
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) did not have
sufficient policies and procedures to ensure employees hired by LEAs were
properly screened and did not have past disciplinary action that precluded
employment to work with children.
Analysis
MSDE did not have sufficient policies and procedures to ensure employees hired
by LEAs were properly screened and did not have past disciplinary action that
precluded employment to work with children.
Pre-employment Screening
MSDE did not establish procedures to ensure LEAs performed the required pre-
employment screenings. State law effective July 1, 2019 (and updated July 1,
2021) requires LEAs to provide screening of positions with direct contact with a
minor. According to MSDE records, approximately 35,000 teachers were hired
since July 1, 2019 that would have required the screening. Our review disclosed
that MSDE did not have any process to verify that the LEAs were conducting the
required screenings. In this regard, recent Office of Legislative Audits reports of
three LEAs disclosed that the required screenings were not always being
performed.
The screenings include a written statement by the applicant attesting they were
not the subject of a child sexual abuse or sexual misconduct investigation by any
employer that resulted in a finding.7 In addition, the LEAs were required to
contact the applicant’s current or prior employers to verify this information.
Identifying Educators with Past Disciplinary Action
MSDE did not ensure LEAs obtain membership in the National Association of
State Directors of Teacher Education and Certification (NASDTEC)
clearinghouse that provides information of disciplinary actions for educators,
including those reported by MSDE. Despite MSDE’s periodic communications to
the LEAs encouraging membership, MSDE management advised that 16 of the 24
LEAs are not members of the clearinghouse and therefore do not have access to
the disciplinary information of all educators. In this regard, the 16 LEAs only
have access to disciplinary information for individuals that have an educator
7 This is in addition to existing requirements, that include obtaining a criminal background check.
12

--- Page 15 ---
licensing record in MSDE’s licensing system since there is an automatic match to
NASDTEC. Therefore, if an educator does not have a record in MSDE’s
licensing system, the 16 LEAs do not have access to these past disciplinary
actions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSDE
a. establish procedures to ensure, at least on a test basis, that required pre-
employment screenings were performed for applicants being hired for
positions with direct access to minors; and
b. ensure LEAs obtain membership in the NASDTEC clearinghouse to
identify and take appropriate actions against individuals with past
disciplinary actions.
Finding 2
MSDE did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure individuals with
disqualifying criminal backgrounds were not employed at LEAs.
Analysis
MSDE did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure individuals with
disqualifying criminal backgrounds were not employed at LEAs. State law
requires LEAs to obtain national and state criminal history record checks for all
employees on or before the first day of employment and prohibits LEAs from
hiring or retaining individuals who have been convicted of certain offenses
against minors, or crimes of violence. State regulations further require denial,
suspension, or revocation of an MSDE educator license for crimes including child
abuse or neglect, which would render the individual ineligible for positions that
require a license, such as teaching.
• MSDE did not establish procedures (such as periodic audits) to ensure LEAs
conducted required criminal background checks on or before the first day of
employment. In addition, MSDE did not establish procedures to ensure LEAs
enrolled all employees with the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services (DPSCS) to obtain alerts of subsequent State criminal activity,
investigate the alerts, and refer any disqualifying activity to MSDE, as
required. Furthermore, our review disclosed that MSDE did not establish
procedures to verify the LEAs complied with this requirement and could not
readily provide the number of alerts received and investigated by the LEAs.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Our test of 15 employees hired by 3 LEAs8 from May 2024 through August
2025, disclosed that criminal background checks were obtained for all 15
employees. However, further analysis of 559 teachers at 1 of these LEAs,
who were hired prior to September 2024 and still employed at the LEA as of
October 2025, disclosed that 191 (approximately 34 percent) were not
enrolled for alerts. MSDE was unaware that the LEA had not enrolled these
teachers and could not readily explain why.
• MSDE did not require LEAs to enroll in the U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigation’s Record of Arrest and Prosecutions Back program (Rap Back)
to continuously monitor criminal history and automatically alert LEAs of
employees with criminal activity in other states. DPSCS advised us that only
1 of the 24 LEAs were enrolled in the Rap Back program, as of October 2025.
According to MSDE’s records, during the 2024-2025 school year, the LEAs had
approximately 130,900 employees.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSDE
a. establish procedures (such as periodic audits) to ensure LEAs obtain
required criminal background checks and alerts, and that these results
are investigated and referred to MSDE as appropriate; and
b. require LEAs to enroll all applicable employees in the Rap Back
program.
Finding 3
MSDE did not monitor LEA teacher assignment practices to ensure teachers
were assigned within their area of licensure, as required.
Analysis
MSDE did not monitor LEA teacher assignment practices to ensure teachers were
assigned within their area of licensure. State regulations require teachers
employed in public schools to hold an appropriate license in their areas of major
assignment and for MSDE to monitor the teacher assignment practices on a
periodic basis.9
8 The 3 LEAs were selected for review from LEAs with ongoing Financial Management Practice
audits during the time of our audit of MSDE.
9 State regulations also allow teachers to teach up to two classes outside their areas of licensure,
with additional classes allowed under certain circumstances.
14

--- Page 17 ---
We obtained listings of teacher assignments from 3 LEAs for the 2024-2025
school year and arbitrarily selected 68 teachers for testing. We compared the
classes assigned for each of these teachers to the teacher’s area of licensure as
recorded in MSDE’s licensing system and noted no instances of unlicensed
teachers or teachers who were improperly assigned.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSDE monitor the class assignment practices of the
LEAs to ensure that teacher assignments are in accordance with their area of
licensure, as required.
Licensing
Finding 4
MSDE did not independently review and approve all initial applications for
educator licenses and related support to ensure the applicant met all
required qualifications.
Analysis
MSDE did not independently review and approve all initial applications for
educator licenses processed by MSDE and LEA employees to ensure the
applicant met all required qualifications. Specifically, MSDE only independently
reviewed one percent of all applications (including initial applications and
renewals). Supporting documentation would include relevant work experience
and educational requirements, as well as scores for assessment and licensing tests.
According to MSDE records, during fiscal year 2025, 6,509 of the 6,573 initial
applications for licensure and supporting documentation were not independently
reviewed to verify applicants were qualified.
We arbitrarily selected 20 initial applications processed between July 2024 and
May 2025 and noted that none of these applications were subject to an
independent approval. Our test of these applications disclosed that they were all
properly issued.
State law and regulations provide that educators are to be initially licensed and
subject to renewal by MSDE. According to MSDE’s records, during the period
April 2022 through August 2025, approximately 67,000 licenses were issued and
renewed, and as of October 2025, there were 96,000 active licenses.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSDE independently review and approve all initial
applications and related supporting documentation to ensure the applicants
meet all required qualifications.
Blueprint Prekindergarten Funding
Finding 5
MSDE did not verify the accuracy of LEAs’ eligibility determinations for
prekindergarten students funded through Blueprint.
Analysis
MSDE did not verify the accuracy of LEAs’ eligibility determinations for
prekindergarten students funded by Blueprint. Starting in fiscal year 2023,
Blueprint prekindergarten funding was provided to LEAs for certain children
from qualifying families (such as household incomes up to 300 percent of the
federal poverty level or who are considered homeless). According to State and
MSDE records during fiscal year 2024, MSDE expended approximately $98.9
million on behalf of 17,177 prekindergarten students.
Our review disclosed that MSDE requires each LEA to maintain documentation
to support the household income used to determine each student’s eligibility but
did not have a process to independently verify these determinations. This is
significant because our testing disclosed that these determinations could not
always be supported, and therefore the LEA may have improperly received
funding for certain students. Specifically, we arbitrarily selected 1 LEA that
received approximately $6.7 million in prekindergarten funds during fiscal year
2024 with 2,112 prekindergarten students as of September 30, 2024 that the LEA
determined were eligible for funding. Our test of 20 of these students10 disclosed
that the LEA could not provide documentation for 5 students to fully support the
household income amount used to determine eligibility (such as income
documentation for both parents with joint custody of the student).
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSDE establish procedures to review documentation to
ensure the accuracy of eligibility determinations made by LEAs for
prekindergarten funding.
10 Students were selected primarily based on the reported household income levels.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 6 and 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MSDE’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Federal Funds
Finding 8
MSDE did not request federal funds timely resulting in lost investment
income totaling at least $3.6 million.
Analysis
MSDE did not ensure federal funds were requested and received timely and may
no longer be able to recover certain federal fund expenditures. According to State
records, during fiscal year 2024, MSDE’s federal fund expenditures totaled
approximately $1.6 billion. This amount includes $422 million for various food
services programs, $352.6 million for Title I grants to improve education and
school conditions, $251.1 million for special education programs, and $565.1
million for other federal programs.
We reviewed three federal grants with expenditures totaling approximately $550
million during the period from July 2023 through September 2024.11 The federal
guidelines for these grants permit reimbursements to be requested when
expenditures are incurred. Our review disclosed that requests for reimbursement
were not submitted timely. For example, MSDE did not request reimbursement
for $194.1 million expended on one grant from December 2023 through July 2024
11 These grants were selected based on the materiality of expenditures.
17

--- Page 20 ---
until September 2024. Consequently, the State lost investment interest totaling at
least $3.6 million from these grants that would have been earned had the funds
been requested and received timely.
Potential Inability to Recover Federal Funds
As of March 2025, MSDE had not requested reimbursement for approximately
$20.7 million in COVID-19 funds which may no longer be available. During
January 2024, MSDE requested and received $90.5 million from the federal
government related to one grant, when it should have requested only $20.7
million. MSDE advised us that it detected this error and returned the entire $90.5
million to the federal government in May 2024 but has not requested the $20.7
million that should have originally been recovered.
In March 2025, the United States Department of Education notified State agencies
that COVID-19 grant liquidation period was ending. However, following an
injunction upheld by the U.S. Court of Appeals in June 2025, reimbursement
requests could again be submitted (see comments above in the Background) but
there is still a possibility that these funds may no longer be available. While some
or all of the remaining funds may ultimately be recovered, to the extent that the
federal funds are not available, State general funds may be needed to cover any
related deficits.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MSDE
a. submit federal fund reimbursement requests timely as permitted under
federal guidelines, and
b. determine the outstanding balance of expenditures that have not been
reimbursed by the federal government and take all available actions to
promptly obtain these funds.
Year-End Closing Entries
Finding 9
MSDE could not provide documentation to support the propriety of accrued
federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent recovery of the funds.
Analysis
MSDE could not provide documentation to support the propriety of accrued
federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent recovery of the funds. At the end
of fiscal year 2024, MSDE recorded 101 accrued federal fund revenue entries
totaling $878.8 million.
18

--- Page 21 ---
• MSDE recorded accrued revenue entries to bring each federal account balance
to zero at year-end without verifying that the amounts recorded were valid and
collectable. Our test of 11 accrued federal fund revenue entries12 recorded at
the end of fiscal year 2024 totaling $525.4 million, disclosed that MSDE
could not readily document that these entries accurately reflected amounts
collectable from the federal government. The lack of documentation is
significant because the $878.8 million accrued at the end of fiscal year 2024
did not seem reasonable as it represented approximately 55 percent of
MSDE’s $1.6 billion in fiscal year 2024 expenditures, which are generally
submitted for reimbursement monthly.
• As of November 1, 2024, MSDE had not requested or could not document the
recovery of funds for 9 of the 11 accrued revenue entries totaling $278
million. For example, for 5 accrued revenue entries totaling $145.3 million,
MSDE had not requested reimbursement from the federal government. For 3
other reimbursements totaling $122 million, MSDE advised the funds were
received but could not document it received $110.7 million of the funds.
While some or all of these amounts may ultimately be recovered, to the extent
that the federal funds are not available, State general funds may be needed to
cover any related deficits.
Similar conditions were included in our reports on the Statewide Review of Budget
Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2023 and 2024.13 The Comptroller of
Maryland General Accounting Division’s year-end closing instructions provide
that accrued revenue transactions should reflect amounts that are collectable
within 60 days of the end of the fiscal year and that revenue should be recognized
in the same fiscal year the expenditure is made. The instructions also require that
detailed documentation to support the transactions be maintained.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MSDE
a. ensure that all accrued federal fund revenue entries are properly
supported, as required by GAD policies;
b. analyze the receivable balances to determine the collectability of any
deficit balances; and
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work
with the Department of Budget and Management to resolve any related
deficits.
12 We selected these test items based on materiality.
13 Subsequent to our fieldwork, similar conditions were included in our report on the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2025.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Technical Assistance Grants and Contracts
Finding 10
MSDE awarded certain grants and contracts totaling $1.2 million without a
competitive process and could not always support that the related
deliverables were received.
Analysis
MSDE awarded certain grants and contracts totaling $1.2 million without a
competitive process, and could not always support that deliverables were
received. We received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging
that MSDE inappropriately awarded certain grants and contracts with specific
vendors without performing a competitive procurement or considering other
qualified vendors. Our review of the allegation disclosed the following
conditions:
Grants to Out-of-State Vendors and Related Payments Not Supported
MSDE awarded two grants totaling $700,000 to an out-of-state vendor ($200,000
in October 2023 and $500,000 in November 2023) without a competitive process
when these services may have been provided by a State university. The grants
were awarded to obtain an analysis of 138 Title I schools14 to identify underlying
issues that impair the school’s performance, and to provide intensive coaching for
27 of these schools.
MSDE could not justify why it did not consider obtaining these services through
an interagency agreement with a State university that had previously provided the
services to MSDE. According to grant documents, MSDE did not competitively
procure the grants because there was an urgent need to complete these services in
accordance with federal requirements. This response does not justify its decision
to use an out-of-state vendor instead of a State university.
MSDE also paid the out-of-state vendor $700,000 in advance of the work being
performed and could not provide any documentation that the analysis and
intensive coaching for certain schools were received. Specifically, MSDE was
only able to provide documentation of self-assessments that were sent to certain
schools, but there was no evidence the vendor performed the required analysis.
MSDE’s written Grant Justification Guidance requires competitive grant awards
and State procurement regulations generally require competitive solicitation for
all procurements unless certain conditions apply, such as the services are available
from a single source.
14 Title I schools receive additional federal funding under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA)
to support students from low-income families.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Sole Source Contracts Were Not Justified and Deliverables Were Not Supported
MSDE could not justify three sole source contracts totaling $489,000 awarded
between October 2021 and August 2022 to one vendor for educational and
training consulting services. The use of the sole source procurement method did
not appear justified since MSDE’s written justifications acknowledged that other
vendors could have provided the services. Rather, MSDE indicated it did not
competitively procure the contract because it would have caused significant
delays in obtaining the services.
MSDE also could not provide documentation that certain deliverables were
received. For example, the deliverables for a $392,000 contract were primarily
meeting with MSDE staff and providing training to LEAs. Our test of 14
payments totaling $249,455 disclosed that the vendor only provided summaries of
work performed without any specific details about meetings or training provided,
such as the dates of the meetings or training and names of subject matter experts
involved.
According to State records, MSDE paid this vendor a total of approximately
$346,000 during the period April 2022 through December 2023. In December
2023, MSDE terminated the contract, which MSDE management advised was due
to the current Superintendent deciding that the work needed to go in a different
direction. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policies and Procedures
Manual states that invoices must sufficiently describe the details of the goods or
services being paid including the date that the goods or services were rendered.
Based on the questionable nature of the awards and the lack of support of the
related deliverables we were able to substantiate the allegation, which we referred
to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division. A referral to the
Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that
criminal charges will be filed.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MSDE
a. competitively procure services in accordance with MSDE’s Grant
Justification Guidance and State procurement regulations;
b. adequately document the scope of services and deliverables to be
provided under each agreement;
c. obtain adequate documentation to support that related services and
deliverables are completed prior to payment; and
d. in conjunction with legal counsel, consider the recovery of funds
previously paid for unsupported services, to the extent practicable.
21

--- Page 24 ---
21st Century Community Learning Centers Grants
Finding 11
MSDE did not always process 21st Century Community Learning Centers
(CCLC) grant reimbursement requests timely including 15 payments totaling
approximately $389,000 that were paid between 106 and 332 days after
receipt of the invoice.
Analysis
MSDE did not always process CCLC grant reimbursement requests within 60
days as required by its grant application. CCLC is a federally funded grant to
provide after-school and summer programs to high-poverty and low-performing
schools. MSDE awarded CCLC grants to private providers, LEAs, and local
government agencies to provide services, such as substance abuse and alcohol
prevention; counseling; and art, music, and technical education to reinforce and
complement the regular academic programs of participating students. According
to State records, from September 2021 through May 2025, MSDE made CCLC
grant payments totaling $30.2 million to 30 private providers and $12.2 million to
7 LEAs and 2 local government agencies.
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that grant
evaluation activities were steered to certain vendors and payments to grantees
were delayed. Based on our review, we were unable to substantiate whether grant
evaluation activities were steered to certain vendors, but we were able to
substantiate that payments to CCLC grantees were delayed. We did not identify
any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s
Criminal Division.
Our analysis of grantee payments from January 2023 to May 2025 disclosed that
219 grantee requests totaling approximately $10.1 million were paid more than
100 days after the related services were provided.15 While some of these delays
may be due to untimely submission of an invoice, our test of 15 of these payments
made to private providers totaling approximately $389,00016 disclosed that MSDE
paid the grantees between 106 and 332 days after receipt of the initial invoice.
For example, for 4 payments totaling $84,323, MSDE advised that it misplaced
the grantee reimbursement request resulting in the payments being made 178 days
to 288 days after the original reimbursement request.
15 MSDE did not record the date it received grant reimbursement requests in the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) but it did usually record the month of service of the requests.
Therefore, we performed our analysis using the latest month of service recorded in FMIS for each request.
The month(s) of service were recorded for 434 requests from private providers with related payments
totaling $24.9 million.
16 Test items were selected from the 219 payments primarily based on materiality.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MSDE process CCLC grant reimbursements within 60
days as required by its grant application.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Department
of Education (MSDE) for the period beginning June 1, 2021 and ending July 15,
2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSDE’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included grants (both for local education agencies {LEAs}
and other educational organizations), monitoring of LEAs’ compliance with
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future, requirements for background checks and
employment pre-screenings, educator licensing, federal funds, procurements and
disbursements, payroll, vocational rehabilitation services, and information
systems security and control. In addition, we reviewed certain activities related to
contracts and grants based on referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline.
Finally, we also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit also included certain support services (including payroll processing,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided by MSDE to its units or divisions. Our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of MSDE’s
compliance with those laws and regulations by MSDE because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MSDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 1, 2021 to July 15, 2024, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
24

--- Page 27 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSDE’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from MSDE’s educator licensing system (such as
application and license data) for the purpose of testing educator licenses, as well
as from the Division of Rehabilitation Services’ financial records for the purpose
of testing certain areas, such as payments made for consumers under individual
plans for employment. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data was
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MSDE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
25

--- Page 28 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSDE, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSDE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSDE that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MSDE and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
26

--- Page 29 ---
MSDE’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MSDE regarding the results of our review of its
response.
27

--- Page 30 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Oversight of Local Education Agencies (LEAs)
Finding 1
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) did not have
sufficient policies and procedures to ensure employees hired by LEAs were
properly screened and did not have past disciplinary action that precluded
employment to work with children.
We recommend that MSDE
a. establish procedures to ensure, at least on a test basis, that required pre-
employment screenings were performed for applicants being hired for
positions with direct access to minors; and
b. ensure LEAs obtain membership in the NASDTEC clearinghouse to
identify and take appropriate actions against individuals with past
disciplinary actions.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Since the enactment of State Education Article § 6-113.2 on July 1,
additional comments as 2019, although not required by statute, the MSDE has constantly
deemed necessary. developed formal guidance documents, multiple memoranda, and
technical assistance. These were provided to the LEA Superintendents
and Human Resources Directors to assist them as they complied with
this regulation. MSDE also provided regular training to the LEA
personnel responsible for conducting employee history reviews to ensure
they are equipped with the necessary skills and knowledge regarding the
required reviews.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/28/2026
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation. MSDE will develop
corrective action or regulations and procedures to ensure LEAs follow the requirements of
explain disagreement. Education Article § 6-113.2 during the hiring process. Specifically,
MSDE will recommend amending COMAR 13A.07.14 - Child Abuse
and Sexual Misconduct, to require each LEA to submit an annual
attestation to the State Board of Education that it has complied with the
requirements of Education Article § 6-113.2.
In addition, MSDE will also recommend that the LEAs be required at
least on a test basis to perform a limited review either internally or
Page 1 of 21

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
externally to ensure compliance with Education Article § 6-113.2. Also,
this recommendation will require the LEAs to provide a copy of the
limited review report to MSDE to ensure that the review was performed.
Furthermore, MSDE will establish a new regulation requiring each LEA
to annually provide a copy of its hiring procedures, which MSDE will
review for alignment with Education Articles §6-113, §6-113.1, and §6-
113.2.
Recommendation 1b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2026
Please provide details of Currently, MSDE does not have the authority to require LEAs to become
corrective action or associate members of the National Association of State Directors of
explain disagreement. Teacher Education and Certification (NASDTEC) Clearinghouse.
Maryland House Bill 1025 from the 2025 legislative session mandating
this requirement did not pass. As an alternative resolution, MSDE will
make a recommendation to the State Board of Education to promulgate a
regulation requiring each LEA to ensure that all its applicants for
positions requiring licensure register in the State licensure system (The
Educator Application and Credentialing Hub or TEACH) before
beginning an assignment. The MSDE maintains annual membership in
NASDTEC. As such, MSDE will receive an immediate notification
from NASDTEC regarding any licensure action taken against an
applicant once the applicant registers in TEACH. We believe this action
will accomplish the objective of Recommendation 1b.
Auditor’s Comment: While MSDE disagrees with recommendation 1b because
it does not have the authority to require LEAs to become associate members of
the National Association of State Directors of Teacher Education and
Certification (NASDTEC) Clearinghouse, MSDE presents an alternative process
that would ensure individuals with past disciplinary actions are identified. That
said, we continue to believe that MSDE should take the necessary steps to ensure
all LEAs enroll in the Clearinghouse to help ensure that educators with
disciplinary action are timely identified by the LEAs.
Page 2 of 21

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MSDE did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure individuals with
disqualifying criminal backgrounds were not employed at LEAs.
We recommend that MSDE
a. establish procedures (such as periodic audits) to ensure LEAs obtain
required criminal background checks and alerts, and that these results
are investigated and referred to MSDE as appropriate; and
b. require LEAs to enroll all applicable employees in the Rap Back
program.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide As noted in the Analysis, “State law requires LEAs to obtain national
additional comments as and state criminal history records checks” for their employees before
deemed necessary. employment. LEAs obtain these criminal history records checks
(CHRCs) directly for their employees, but MSDE does not receive the
results and is not required to receive the results.
Although the statute vests LEAs, and not MSDE, with responsibility for
completing the CHRC on or before a prospective employee’s first day of
employment, MSDE nevertheless provides guidance and technical
assistance to LEA employers regarding the requirements of the law. To
be sure, some criminal convictions preclude employment with children,
but others do not. As a result, LEA employers may, and often do,
develop broader policies that prohibit the hiring of applicants with
criminal convictions beyond those prohibited by Education Article § 6-
113. As MSDE has advised LEAs in the past, employers should work
internally and with their own legal counsel to properly vet applicants and
investigate CHRC results to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of all
Maryland students.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/31/2026
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation. MSDE will recommend the
corrective action or promulgation of regulations requiring the LEAs to (1) obtain criminal
explain disagreement. background checks, related alerts and the related results are investigated,
and referred to MSDE as appropriate; (2) submit an annual attestation to
the State Board of Education that it has complied with the approved
regulation; and (3) at least on a test basis to perform a limited review
Page 3 of 21

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
either internally or externally to ensure compliance with the approved
regulation. Also, the proposed regulation will require the LEAs to
provide a copy of the report to MSDE to document the review was
performed.
Finally, once the proposed regulations are enacted, MSDE will develop
procedures which will ensure the enacted regulations are complied with
by the LEAs.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/31/2026
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. As required by COMAR 12.15.01.19A(1) and 12.15.06.04A(1), if a non-
criminal justice government agency is authorized by State statute to
receive federal criminal history records information, the Central
Repository shall enroll the non-criminal justice government agency in
the FBI Rap Back Program. MSDE will coordinate with the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services to ensure all
LEAs are enrolled in the Rap Back Program. While the Agency will
perform the prior mentioned process, MSDE does not have the authority
to enforce that CJIS must comply with the provisions of the prior
mentioned COMAR citations.
Page 4 of 21

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MSDE did not monitor LEA teacher assignment practices to ensure teachers
were assigned within their area of licensure, as required.
We recommend that MSDE monitor the class assignment practices of the
LEAs to ensure that teacher assignments are in accordance with their area of
licensure, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2026
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation. MSDE will develop policies
corrective action or and procedures to monitor annually the assignment of teachers in the
explain disagreement. LEAs to ensure that teacher assignments are in accordance with their
area of licensure as required in COMAR 13A.12.02.08.
Page 5 of 21

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Licensing
Finding 4
MSDE did not independently review and approve all initial applications for
educator licenses and related support to ensure the applicant met all
required qualifications.
We recommend that MSDE independently review and approve all initial
applications and related supporting documentation to ensure the applicants
meet all required qualifications.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The analysis is factually accurate; however, it is important to note that
additional comments as the audit of licensure records did not identify any instance in which a
deemed necessary. license was issued in error by an MSDE licensure specialist or an LEA
licensure partner.
The analysis cited the number of “initial applications” as 6,573;
however, the recommendation appears to require the MSDE to perform
an independent review for each license issued for the first time to an
educator. This must take into account the initial issuance of each of the
following licenses: Conditional, Initial Professional, Professional, and
Advanced Professional. Because educators advance to the next level of
licensure through the Renewal/Advancement Application, as opposed to
submitting another Initial Application, this figure significantly
understates the total number of first-time licenses issued during the
period reviewed.
In assessing the operational impact of this recommendation, MSDE must
account for the total number of applications reviewed, rather than only
those approved and issued, as each application requires the same level of
review regardless of outcome.
From July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2025, MSDE licensure specialists
and LEA licensure partners received 38,929 applications, including
Initial, Renewal/Advancement, Endorsement, and Removal of
Endorsement applications. Of these, MSDE licensure specialists
processed 10,280 applications. During the same period, MSDE
licensure staff completed an additional 1,661 educator name-change and
licensure verification requests.
Page 6 of 21

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
During this timeframe, 33,230 Initial and Renewal/Advancement
applications were processed by MSDE licensure specialists and LEA
licensure partners. Of these, 26,824 were approved and resulted in a
license being issued. Of the approved applications, 19,916 were
processed through the Renewal/Advancement pathway; however, MSDE
is unable to distinguish renewals from advancements within this subset.
As a result, it is unclear how many Renewal/Advancement applications
led to the initial issuance of a license.
During this period, MSDE employed five licensure specialists.
Collectively, these specialists reviewed 10,280 applications across all
application types. Assuming each specialist worked 2,080 hours
annually and that workload was evenly distributed, this equates to
approximately one application reviewed per hour. Licensure specialists
also perform additional statutory and operational duties, including
responding to public inquiries, providing technical assistance to LEAs
and schools, supporting LEA licensure partners, and delivering statewide
training.
Based on the volume of Initial and Renewal/Advancement applications
processed (33,230) during the period reviewed, MSDE would require 16
licensure specialists, 10 additional grade 22 Education Specialist I
positions, to implement a mandatory secondary review while
maintaining the current service level agreement of a 6–8 week
processing timeframe. This estimate assumes that a secondary review
would double the review workload, that per specialist productivity
remains constant, and that existing service level expectations must be
maintained.
Recommendation 4 Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2026
Please provide details of All FY2025 initial licensure applications submitted were reviewed by an
corrective action or extensively trained LEA credentialing authorized partner (“designee”) or
explain disagreement. by an MSDE licensing specialist to ensure that the applicants meet all
regulatory requirements for licensure.
MSDE performed an independent review of 1% of all approved FY2025
applications. MSDE will develop policies and procedures to document
the 1% independent review process and consider modification of the
scope as resources become available.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE disagrees with the recommendation and notes that
the finding analysis understates the number of first-time licenses issued during the
Page 7 of 21

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
period reviewed. However, the analysis specifically identifies initial applications
as this is the first time applicant information is subject to unilateral review and
approval by a licensing specialist.
In addition, MSDE disagrees with the recommendation because all FY2025 initial
licensure applications submitted were reviewed by an extensively trained LEA
credentialing authorized partner or by an MSDE licensing specialist, and because
MSDE performs an independent review of 1 percent of all approved FY2025
applications. However, without an independent review of a sufficient number of
applications, MSDE lacks assurance that licensing determinations are proper and
adequately supported. As a result, we continue to believe that the analysis is
accurate and the recommendation is valid.
Page 8 of 21

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Blueprint Prekindergarten Funding
Finding 5
MSDE did not verify the accuracy of LEAs’ eligibility determinations for
prekindergarten students funded through Blueprint.
We recommend that MSDE establish procedures to review documentation to
ensure the accuracy of eligibility determinations made by LEAs for
prekindergarten funding.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation. Commencing with the State
corrective action or Aid Audit performed during FY2025, procedures for testing income
explain disagreement. eligibility determination was performed; however, documentation of this
procedure was not complete. Commencing with the FY2026 State Aid
Audit Cycle, the State Aid Audit Program which contains the audit
procedures has been revised to require complete documentation
regarding the testing performed for income eligibility determination.
This was implemented for LEAs audited starting FY2026.
Page 9 of 21

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 6 and 7 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MSDE’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, MSDE’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 10 of 21

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 8
MSDE did not request federal funds timely resulting in lost investment
income totaling at least $3.6 million.
We recommend that MSDE
a. submit federal fund reimbursement requests timely as permitted under
federal guidelines, and
b. determine the outstanding balance of expenditures that have not been
reimbursed by the federal government and take all available actions to
promptly obtain these funds.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Regarding the ‘Potential Inability to Recover Federal Funds’ portion of
additional comments as Finding 8 and the ‘Federal Funds for COVID-19 Grants’ portion of the
deemed necessary. Background section, MSDE is providing the following additional
information so that the reader of the report has a more comprehensive
understanding of the efforts made by the Agency to recover COVID-19
funds from the Federal government.
The US Department of Education (USED), in February 2025, rescinded
all previously approved liquidation extensions and revised the
reimbursement process for COVID funds. At that time, MSDE had
submitted reimbursement for $193 million. MSDE revised its requests
for extension and reimbursement multiple times due to changing
requirements and guidance. At that time, MSDE resubmitted its
reimbursement requests and has revised and resubmitted the requests at
total eight times to clarify the requests at USED’s request. Since April
2025, MSDE has been engaged in multi-prong efforts in recovering the
COVID-19 grants from the federal government. These included direct
engagement with the USED, participating in a multi-state coalition
lawsuit against the federal government and engaging Maryland’s
congressional delegations to impress upon the USED the importance of
timely reimbursement. In June 2025, the USED reversed the decision to
end the extended liquidation period and restored the original liquidation
period of March 31, 2026. However, due to the continued layoffs and
attrition within the USED as well as the federal government shutdown,
Page 11 of 21

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
the reimbursement process did not progress as quickly as anticipated. As
of December 15, 2025, MSDE has been reimbursed for three of the five
programs, receiving $4 million. On December 18, 2025, the USED
approved $101,123,037.12 in ARP ESSER III reimbursements. On
December 22, 2025, the USED approved $520,670 in ARP-HCY
reimbursements. The reimbursements received from August 21, 2025
through January 7, 2026 total $105,679,649. MSDE is currently
working on recovering $87,451,314 in CRRSAA (ESSER II) funds.
MSDE is working with the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM) to begin reimbursing the LEAs for any additional ESSER III
expenditures incurred by them and liquidate the remaining funds (nearly
$44 million) by the extended liquidation deadline of March 31, 2026.
As part of the corrective action plan for the 2023 and 2024 closeout
audits, MSDE temporarily paused the federal fund draw process in order
to reconcile overdrawn grants. At the same time, MSDE reviewed and
revised its federal fund draw policy and procedures. Additionally,
MSDE made significant operational changes. A new Deputy Chief
Financial Officer (CFO) position for fiscal services was established with
the key responsibility to address the fiscal issues facing the Department.
Key priorities were filling vacant positions with highly capable staff,
reviewing and revising, as necessary, all policies and processes for the
fiscal team, and ensuring all fiscal staff are properly trained on the
policies and procedures. The impact of these efforts is identified in the
progress statements below.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. MSDE staff reviewed and revised appropriate policies and procedures
regarding the federal fund draw process. The revised policies include
the tools necessary to evaluate expenditures against the federal award
and revenue received to data, and to allocate revenue to the appropriate
grant and grant phase in FMIS once the revenue is received. The revised
process has been in effect since fall 2025. MSDE completes the federal
draw process for all grants at least twice per month. For federal grants
that fund positions, the draw process can occur three times per month,
once for each payroll and once for subgrant expenditures.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Page 12 of 21

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. MSDE staff spent the last two years reconciling federal grant funds to
ensure accurate draw down amounts as well as correct allocation of
federal revenue. This work resulted in the revised policy and procedures
mentioned in the response to recommendation 8a. As part of this work,
all federal grants received by the department were reviewed and all
available federal funds were drawn down. As mentioned in the response
to 8a, federal grant expenditures are reviewed at least twice per month as
part of the revised federal draw process.
Page 13 of 21

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Year-End Closing Entries
Finding 9
MSDE could not provide documentation to support the propriety of accrued
federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent recovery of the funds.
We recommend that MSDE
a. ensure that all accrued federal fund revenue entries are properly
supported, as required by GAD policies;
b. analyze the receivable balances to determine the collectability of any
deficit balances; and
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work
with the Department of Budget and Management to resolve any related
deficits.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide This is a finding from the 2023 and 2024 closeout audits. The corrective
additional comments as action plan for the 2024 closeout audit has been implemented.
deemed necessary.
MSDE reviewed the accrual practices to identify gaps that needed to be
addressed. MSDE revised its practice to ensure revenue is accrued at the
appropriation and grant level to avoid discrepancies. MSDE has also
established processes for ensuring detailed backup documentation
supporting each accrual is retained.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. This is a finding from the 2023 and 2024 closeout audits. The corrective
action plan for the 2024 closeout audit has been implemented.
For the FY 2025 close, MSDE accrued revenue at both the appropriation
and PCA levels, with identification at the FMIS grant level, consistent
with the corrective action plan. MSDE provided full supporting
documentation for the sample requested during the OLA fiscal year 2025
closeout audit for total accrual, including:
• Revenue and Expenditure Cognos reports highlighting the
balances accrued.
• FY 2025 cash expenditure and accrued expenditure reports that
matched the FMIS screen.
Page 14 of 21

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
• 66-screen report at the grant level.
• DAFR 9090 reports at both the grant and appropriation levels.
• Treasury report showing the subsequent receipt of these balances
in FY 2026.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. This is a finding from the 2023 and 2024 closeout audits. The corrective
action plan for the 2024 closeout audit has been implemented.
MSDE’s review of receivables were categorized into two areas – those
that should be sent to CCU and those that should be included as a write
off. Reminder letters were sent to all receivable accounts from fiscal
2023 onwards. Those deemed not recoverable, i.e. unable to establish
contact, were sent to CCU. In addition, all receivables between 2000
and 2021 were included in a write-off request. The Department found
available indirect cost funds to cover the amount in the write-off request.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/15/2025
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. MSDE’s review of receivables were categorized into two areas – those
that should be sent to CCU and those that should be included as a write
off. Reminder letters were sent to all receivable accounts from fiscal
2023 onwards. Those deemed not recoverable, i.e. unable to establish
contact, were sent to CCU. In addition, all receivables between 2000
and 2021 were included in a write-off request. The Department found
available indirect cost funds to cover the amount in the write-off request.
Auditor’s Comment: While MSDE agrees with the recommendations, it notes
that this is a finding from the 2023 and 2024 closeout audits. It further notes that
MSDE provided full supporting documentation for the sample requested during
the OLA fiscal year 2025 closeout audit however, as noted in the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2025, dated December
18, 2025, MSDE could not provide documentation to support the propriety of
accrued federal fund revenue entries totaling $176 million or the subsequent
recovery of certain of these funds.
Page 15 of 21

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Technical Assistance Grants and Contracts
Finding 10
MSDE awarded certain grants and contracts totaling $1.2 million without a
competitive process and could not always support that the related
deliverables were received.
We recommend that MSDE
a. competitively procure services in accordance with MSDE’s Grant
Justification Guidance and State procurement regulations;
b. adequately document the scope of services and deliverables to be
provided under each agreement;
c. obtain adequate documentation to support that related services and
deliverables are completed prior to payment; and
d. in conjunction with legal counsel, consider the recovery of funds
previously paid for unsupported services, to the extent practicable.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2026
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. MSDE follows the State of Maryland procurement guidelines as well as
best practices recommended in chapter 4.1 of the procurement manual
(to competitively procure goods and services using the allowable
procurement vehicles such as Request for Quote (RFQ), Request for
Proposals (RFP), Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchase Agreement
(ICPA) and Invitation for Bid (IFB). The contract awards are approved
by appropriate authority with any contract award over $200,000
requiring the Board of Public Works (BPW) approval.
On rare occasions, MSDE, like other state agencies, awards sole source
contracts with appropriate justification. MSDE will continue to ensure
that sole source awards are rare, necessary and properly justified.
MSDE has implemented a process (MSDE Delegated Procurement and
Contracting Authority) that sole source awards over $50,000 will require
approval from the head of the agency.
Page 16 of 21

--- Page 47 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
In addition, MSDE will competitively procure services in accordance
with MSDE’s Grant Justification Guidance. However, MSDE will
review with the Attorney General’s Office the appropriateness of this
guidance.
Finally, the Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Education
(OIGE) performed an investigation regarding a complaint alleging that a
no bid contract was awarded by MSDE outside of the State’s
procurement process. The OIGE’s investigation did not substantiate the
allegation.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/28/2026
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. When MSDE awards a contract and enters into contract agreements, the
scope of work and deliverables are documented in the contract in
consultation with the program specialists within the Department as
recommended in chapter 4.1.3 – 4.1.5 of the State procurement manual.
In addition, MSDE will update the procurement checklist that
accompanies each procurement file to ensure that the MSDE Director of
Procurement signs off that appropriate scope of services and deliverables
have been included in the contract.
Recommendation 10c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2026
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. MSDE follows the payment process recommendations established in
chapter 8.3 of the State procurement manual (to ensure accurate invoices
and appropriate documentation is received). In addition, the Agency
follows invoice requirements specified by chapter 3.1.5 of the State of
Maryland Accounting Procedures Manual for the Use of State Agencies.
MSDE will establish an invoice processing Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) by March 31, 2026. This will be communicated to
staff responsible for contract management and payment processing. The
SOP will be shared with the internal MSDE staff at the beginning of
each new contract kick off.
Recommendation 10d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2026
Page 17 of 21

--- Page 48 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. Regarding the cited contract and grant, the individuals who had the lead
and worked with the two vendors are no longer employed by the
Department and does not have access to them. This lack of staff makes
it difficult to review paid invoices and align them to the deliverables
contained in their Statement of Work. However, MSDE will work with
our legal counsel to determine appropriate next steps and actions.
In the future, payment to vendors who have been awarded a grant or
contract will be based on submission of evidence of work completion
aligned with the Statement of Work, prior to reimbursement.
Page 18 of 21

--- Page 49 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
21st Century Community Learning Centers Grants
Finding 11
MSDE did not always process 21st Century Community Learning Centers
(CCLC) grant reimbursement requests timely including 15 payments totaling
approximately $389,000 that were paid between 106 and 332 days after
receipt of the invoice.
We recommend that MSDE process CCLC grant reimbursements within 60
days as required by its grant application.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide Respectfully, MSDE would like to provide comments regarding a few
additional comments as inaccuracies and information which would provide a better
deemed necessary. understanding of the 21st Century Community Learning Center grant
reimbursement process.
Given the submission of a timely, complete, and compliant invoice,
identified as “approvable,” MSDE remains committed to upholding the
approximate six to eight weeks payment-processing timeline as stated in
the original grant application.
An “approvable” invoice means that the subgrantee has submitted an
invoice in compliance with MSDE’s “Reimbursable Invoice Procedures”
which have been provided to 21st Century Community Learning Center
(21st CCLC) grantees. Also, historically MSDE has provided real time
support to 21st CCLC grantees regarding these procedures including
several conferences and training sessions throughout the year. However,
despite these efforts, many reimbursement requests received from 21st
CCLC grantees do not comply with MSDE’s “Reimbursable Invoice
Procedures” and therefore resulted in untimely payments. Therefore, the
statement that “While some of these delays may be due to untimely
submission of an invoice” is incorrect as the failure of 21st CCLC
grantees to comply with required invoice procedures is a key cause of
untimely payments.
The criteria utilized in this Finding to determine whether a
Reimbursement Request was processed timely was based upon the
Page 19 of 21

--- Page 50 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
number of days between when the last month the service was delivered
and the payment date. The date-of-service utilized does not demonstrate
that costs were paid or that adequate documentation exists. This model
does not account for invoices that were submitted several months late or
multiple months of invoices being submitted at one time. Subgrantees
are required to submit monthly invoices on the 15th of each month for
expenses that occurred during the preceding month. The date-of-service
model does not incorporate the time required to complete corrective
action reviews needed to produce sufficient evidence for payment
approval. For example, if an invoice was sent for corrective action, the
date of service remained unchanged in the model that was used. This
process generally inflates the number of days in determining whether the
60 day criteria is met. MSDE recomputed the number of days between
the date when an “approvable” invoice was received and the payment
date and determined that 14 of the cited 15 untimely payments were
actually made within the 60-day criteria.
Finally, to ensure timely payment of 21st CCLC reimbursement
requests, Terms and Conditions #8 & #9 in the “Additional
Information” section of 21st CCLC Notice of Grant Awards states: “No
payments shall be made to the grantee if reporting requirements are not
met. Meeting reporting requirements entails submitting an approvable
report to MSDE by the due date. Delinquent submission of reports could
jeopardize receiving full funding against this grant” and “The grantee
shall request payment and provide a monthly reimbursement cover sheet
with documentation to support expenses no later than the 15th of each
month.”
Furthermore, the signature of the 21st CCLC grantee on the Recipient
Grant Assurances page of the grant signifies that they will comply with
all the terms and conditions of their grant.
Recommendation 11 Agree Estimated Completion Date: On-going
Please provide details of MSDE agrees with the recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. To ensure that grant reimbursements are made within 60 days from the
date of an “approvable” invoice is received, the following actions have
been taken.
• The filling of the Fiscal Compliance Specialist position which is
responsible for reimbursement processing.
Page 20 of 21

--- Page 51 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Agency Response Form
• The 21st CCLC team has been expanded to include three
additional contractual fiscal full-time positions dedicated to
invoice evidence review and payment processing. A specific role
has been assigned to monitor the invoice pipeline to assist within
internal organization, timely processing, and efficient closeout.
• MSDE has established structured submission schedules,
standardized review checklists, and communication protocols
with subrecipients to reduce delays while upholding compliance.
• The 21st CCLC team continues to work on enhancing the
reimbursement cycle through clearer guidance to subgrantees,
expanded training on documentation standards, and technology
solutions for faster evidence review.
• MSDE has deployed integrated reporting systems to align
bookkeeping between subgrantees and MSDE helping to
expedite evidence review and payment issuance.
• Efforts are underway to fill the Extended Learning Specialist
(ELS) position that provides programmatic and fiscal support to
subgrantees.
• MSDE has implemented and will continue refining a partial
payment model. This model allows reasonable monthly
expenditures to be reimbursed while individual line items
requiring additional substantiation can be addressed separately
through subsequent partial payments. This approach expedites
cash flow to subgrantees.
Auditor’s Comment: While MSDE agrees with the recommendation, it notes
that our analysis is factually inaccurate because the date-of-service utilized as the
criteria to determine whether the Reimbursement Request was processed timely
does not demonstrate that costs were paid or that adequate documentation exists.
However, the analysis acknowledges that some of these delays may be due to
untimely submission of an acceptable invoice by the grantee. In addition, our test
disclosed that 4 of the 15 grantee reimbursement requests were misplaced by
MSDE resulting in the payments being made 178 to 288 days after the original
reimbursement request. Documentation to support MSDE’s computation was not
provided. Therefore, we continue to believe that the analysis is accurate and the
recommendation is valid based on the information provided by MSDE at the time
of our review.
Page 21 of 21

--- Page 52 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Anthony V. Calcagno
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Senior Auditors
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Summer L. Carbaugh, CPA
Tari J. Covington
Ali A. Dayya
Jordan Duke, CFE
Mia W. Foelster
Matthew K. Gonglewski
Jillian A. Novak, CPA
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Jonathan D. Souders
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Charles O. Price
Neha S. Tirkey
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors