Title: Morgan State University
Date: 2026-02-06
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=698bb06621011af0cf4e0787
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:10:12.246668
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Morgan State University
February 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 6, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Morgan State University (MSU)
for the period beginning May 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2025. MSU operates
under a Board of Regents and offers baccalaureate, masters, and doctoral degree
programs. MSU has been officially designated by State law as Maryland’s
preeminent public urban research university.
Our audit disclosed that MSU continued to obtain unarmed security guard
services under an expired emergency contract from March 2016 without seeking
subsequent competition, a condition noted but not corrected from our prior report.
As of June 2025, since the initial emergency procurement, MSU’s payments to
this vendor totaled approximately $29.4 million. During the current audit period,
MSU continued to obtain unarmed security guard services from the vendor
without a competitive procurement or a formal contract. Furthermore, MSU
could not support the basis for the rates being paid to the vendor which were
significantly higher than the hourly rate in the 2016 contract and the rates paid by
two other State agencies for similar services.
Our audit also identified concerns with MSU’s procurement processes. In this
regard, MSU did not always publish solicitations and/or awards, obtain Board of
Public Works approval, secure vendor proposals and bids, and submit certain
required annual reports. For example, our review of 14 procurements totaling
$69.3 million (each over $100,000), disclosed that MSU did not publish the
solicitations and/or awards for 8 procurements totaling $37.4 million. The failure
to publish the solicitation and award is significant because 3 of these
procurements were awarded based on a single proposal/bid. These conditions

--- Page 4 ---
were caused, at least in part, because MSU’s Procurement Policies and
Procedures had not been updated since 2005 and did not accurately reflect current
procurement requirements and practices.
We also found that MSU did not always ensure invoices were properly supported,
goods and services were received, and vendors were paid timely. For example,
our test of 56 invoices totaling $21 million disclosed that MSU paid 5 invoices
totaling $583,000 prior to the related goods or services being received including 3
totaling $267,900 for which the goods and services still had not been received as
of October 2025. In addition, for 4 other invoices totaling $297,400, MSU did not
have adequate documentation to support amounts invoiced and paid were
consistent with the related contracts. Similar conditions were commented upon in
our two preceding audit reports dating back to January 2019 but were not
sufficiently corrected.
In addition, MSU did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure criminal
background checks were properly completed for dining and catering services and
unarmed security guard vendor employees. As a result, MSU did not identify one
unarmed security guard employee who had a criminal background and was
assigned to work at MSU. MSU was not aware of the individual’s conviction for
possession of narcotics with intent to distribute before we brought it to their
attention. Upon being notified, MSU and the vendor investigated this matter that
resulted in the immediate termination of the vendor’s employee in December
2025.
We also noted that MSU did not ensure that employees who were terminated or
left State service were promptly removed from the payroll, resulting in improper
payments to at least eight former employees totaling approximately $150,000.
For example, MSU identified that it paid a retired employee $51,000 for seven
months after leaving State service, but as of November 2025, $48,000 had not
been recovered.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
2

--- Page 5 ---
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
MSU’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MSU’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding. We reviewed the response to our
findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MSU.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Procurements and Disbursements
* Finding 1 – MSU continued to obtain unarmed security guard services 12
under an expired emergency contract from March 2016 without
seeking subsequent competition. In addition, MSU could not support
the hourly rates billed by the vendor.
Finding 2 – MSU did not always publish solicitations and/or awards, 14
obtain Board of Public Works approval, secure vendor proposals and
bids submitted and stored electronically, and submit certain required
annual reports. In addition, MSU’s Procurement Policies and
Procedures had not been updated since 2005 and did not accurately
reflect current procurement requirements and practices.
* Finding 3 – MSU did not always ensure invoices were properly supported, 16
goods and services were received, and did not always pay vendors
timely.
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 4 – MSU did not ensure that criminal background checks were 17
completed for certain contractors, resulting in one individual with a
previous conviction for possession of narcotics with intent to distribute
working on campus.
Payroll
Finding 5 – MSU did not ensure that employees who were terminated 18
or left State service were promptly removed from the payroll, resulting
in improper payments to at least eight former employees totaling
approximately $150,000.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 19
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 20
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Morgan State University (MSU), which is designated as the State’s preeminent
public urban research university, offers baccalaureate, masters, and doctoral
programs. MSU is governed by a Board of Regents appointed by the Governor
with the advice and consent of the Maryland Senate. Based on MSU’s records, its
student population for the Fall 2025 semester totaled 11,559, including 9,554
undergraduate students and 2,005 graduate students.
As depicted in Figure 1, MSU’s expenditures increased annually between fiscal
years 2021 and 2025 from approximately $274.7 million to $507.7 million.
According to MSU management,
this increase in expenditures
Figure 1
was primarily due to the
MSU Expenditures and Enrollment
annual increase to student
Fiscal Years 2021 through 2025
enrollment (also shown in
(dollar amounts in millions)
Figure 1) which increased
operational costs including
salaries for personnel and
maintenance for its facilities, and
11,559
increased spending on research
10,739
activities in the pursuit of
9,808
achieving a Very High Research
Activity1 (R1) status. 9,101
8,469
MSU’s budget is funded by
unrestricted revenues, such as
$507.7
tuition and fees, a State general $456.5
$411.7
$343.0
fund appropriation, and restricted $274.7
revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts (see Figure 2).
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Enrollment
During the period of June 30, Expenditures
2021 through June 30, 2025,
Source: MSU enrollment and State financial records
MSU had vacancy rates that
ranged from 9.5 percent to 12.5
1 An R1 university is a doctoral university that has the highest level of research activity, according
to the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. To achieve this status, a
university must meet specific criteria, including spending at least $50 million annually on
research and awarding at least 70 doctoral degrees a year.
7

--- Page 10 ---
percent. As of June 30, 2025, approximately 11.9 percent of the total 1,882
positions were vacant. These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to
the findings in this report.
Figure 2
MSU Positions, Expenditures, and Funding
Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 1,658
Vacant 224
Total 1,882
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $222,382,257
Technical and Special Fees 41,666,497
Operating Expenses 243,670,687
Total $507,719,441
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
Unrestricted2 $394,815,197
Restricted3 112,904,244
Total $507,719,441
Source: State financial records and MSU personnel records
According to the Department of Budget & Management’s fiscal year 2025 Capital
Budget White Book, MSU had authorized capital improvement projects with
budgeted funds totaling approximately $372.8 million during the period from
fiscal year 2021 to fiscal year 2025. The two largest authorized capital budgets
during this period totaled $159.7 million and $122.2 million for the design and
construction of the Health and Human Services Building and Science Center,
respectively. Construction of the Health and Human Services Building began in
2 Includes general fund, tuition and fees, and other sources such as Auxiliary Services and the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Settlement.
3 Includes federal grants, contracts and other gifts.
8

--- Page 11 ---
October 2021 and was completed in October 2024; construction for the Science
Center began in May 2025 and is expected to be completed by August 2028.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the ten findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 22, 2022. See Figure 3 for the
results of our review.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MSU did not adequately monitor the vendor responsible for
Finding 1 disbursing student refunds to ensure the refunds were properly Not Repeated
issued and unissued refunds were returned.
MSU did not independently verify the propriety of adjustments
Finding 2 to student room and board charges, certain of which were not Not Repeated
processed in accordance with MSU policy.
Reviews of changes to student residency status were either not
documented or not independent; and certain changes were not
Finding 3 Not Repeated
subject to review because system output reports used for this
purpose were incomplete.
MSU did not adequately review deferred payment plan
Finding 4 Not Repeated
agreements to ensure they were proper.
MSU did not periodically ensure that all eligible delinquent
Finding 5 accounts were referred to the State’s Central Collection Unit Not Repeated
within the required time period.
MSU did not conduct comprehensive reviews of honors
scholarship awards to ensure the awards were proper, and did
Finding 6 not take required action when students did not maintain their Not Repeated
eligibility. As a result, certain awards were overstated or
issued to ineligible students.
MSU did not procure certain goods and services in accordance
Repeated
with its policies and procedures, and did not ensure related
Finding 7 (Current Findings
goods and services were received and amounts invoiced were
1 and 3)
proper.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 8 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.4 Status Redacted4
Finding 9 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.4 Status Redacted4
Finding 10 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.4 Status Redacted4
4 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
has been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement and Disbursements
Background
Effective July 1, 2004, legislation was passed that generally exempts Morgan
State University (MSU) from State law governing procurement subject to the
development of policies and procedures and approval by the MSU Board of
Regents and Board of Public Works (BPW). MSU’s Procurement Policies and
Procedures was approved by the Morgan State University Board of Regents and
BPW in 2005.
According to State and MSU records, approximately 6,200 purchase orders
totaling $747.5 million (including capital construction activity) were issued and
46,000 payments totaling $875.3 million were made between the period of May 1,
2021 and June 30, 2025.5
Our review of procurements and disbursements included the following: 6
• We judgmentally selected and reviewed the procurements of 4 contracts
collectively valued at $39.4 million for services related to the demolition and
construction of the Science Center, maintenance of a roadway by the stadium,
and campus security/safety equipment.
• We reviewed unarmed security guard services with related payments totaling
approximately $20.2 million during the audit period, which included 7
payments totaling $694,000 that were tested.
• We reviewed 12 change orders totaling $22.1 million for a vendor contracted
in May 2020 to provide dining and catering services.
• We tested certain procurement attributes for 11 other contracts totaling $32.7
million for services relating to campus transportation, security systems,
information technology, facility maintenance, and construction.
• We analyzed activity by procurement method to determine whether certain
limits or thresholds were exceeded, and whether MSU complied with certain
procurement requirements.
5 There were timing differences which accounted for the payments exceeding the purchase order
amounts. That is, payments were made during the referenced period which related to purchase
orders from prior periods.
6 The vendors and activity selected for testing were based on materiality, significance of the
services provided, or to follow up on issues identified by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA)
in the preceding audit.
11

--- Page 14 ---
• We reviewed MSU’s contract monitoring and disbursements processes for
four contracts (from the first bullet) with expenditures totaling $20.3 million
as of June 30, 2025, of which 9 payments totaling $6.5 million were tested.
• We also tested 44 disbursements totaling $13.8 million relating to a variety of
goods and services such as purchases with research grant funds, dining and
catering services, and student housing.
Finding 1
MSU continued to obtain unarmed security guard services under an expired
emergency contract from March 2016 without seeking subsequent
competition. In addition, MSU could not support the hourly rates billed by
the vendor.
Analysis
MSU continued to obtain unarmed security services under an expired contract.
The initial contract was an emergency procurement in March 2016 and expired in
October 2016 with payments totaling $667,627. MSU continued to use the
services of this vendor without competition through the improper use of an
Intergovernmental
Figure 4
Cooperative Purchasing
Agreement (ICPA) between Payments to Unarmed Security
November 2016 and June Guard Vendor
2023 with payments
March 1, 2016 to June 30, 2025
totaling $16.2 million
Procurement
which was addressed in our Period Payments
Method
prior audit report of MSU.7
March 1, 2016 to
Emergency $667,627
As depicted in Figure 4, October 31, 2016
payments totaled $29.4 Improper use November 1, 2016 to
16,169,267
million since the initial of ICPA June 30, 2023
July 1, 2023
contract through June 30, None 12,544,914
to June 30, 2025
2025. Our current review
Total Payments $29,381,808
disclosed the following:
Source: State and MSU financial records
• During the current audit period, MSU continued to obtain unarmed security
services from the vendor with related payments totaling $20.7 million without
competitive procurement or a formal contract. In addition, although MSU
obtained BPW retroactive approval for use of the vendor through June 30,
2023, MSU did not receive approval for $12.5 million in payments made
subsequent to the approval. While MSU attempted to competitively procure
7 Our preceding audit found that MSU was not eligible to use the ICPA, services were not
competitively procured, and a contract was not executed.
12

--- Page 15 ---
these services during the audit period, we were advised that these
procurements were cancelled due to procedural issues, such as the solicitation
being under the wrong procurement method and lacking legal sufficiency.
• MSU could not support the basis for the rates being paid to the vendor which
were significantly higher than the $19 hourly rate in the 2016 contract and
rates paid by two other State agencies for similar services. For example, our
review of rates for unarmed security officers under four competitively
procured contracts at two State agencies (including one university) disclosed
that as of May 31, 2025, the hourly rate of $27.20 paid by MSU for an
unarmed security officer was 19.8 percent higher than the $22.70 average rate
paid on the other contracts.8
MSU’s Procurement Policies and Procedures generally require competitive
procurements, as well as executed contracts with certain specific terms and
conditions (including the scope of the contract, compensation, and method of
payment), for purchases over $100,000. The Policies and Procedures also require
BPW approval for service contracts valued over $1 million.
A similar condition regarding MSU not competitively procuring or obtaining
BPW approval for unarmed security guard services was commented upon in our
preceding audit report. MSU’s response to that report indicated that by December
2022, it would issue a competitive procurement and obtain appropriate approvals
including the BPW.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSU
a. competitively procure and execute contracts in accordance with its
policies and procedures (repeat);
b. obtain BPW approval as required, including retroactive approval for the
unarmed security guard services noted above (repeat); and
c. evaluate hourly rates being billed for unarmed security guard services,
and take appropriate action.
8 MSU is billed for different positions including security officer, sergeant, and lieutenant.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 2
MSU did not always publish solicitations and/or awards, obtain BPW
approval, secure vendor proposals and bids submitted and stored
electronically, and submit certain required annual reports. In addition,
MSU’s Procurement Policies and Procedures had not been updated since 2005
and did not accurately reflect current procurement requirements and
practices.
Analysis
MSU did not always publish solicitations and/or awards, obtain BPW approval,
secure vendor proposals and bids submitted and stored electronically, and submit
certain required annual reports. In addition, MSU’s Procurement Policies and
Procedures had not been updated since 2005 and did not accurately reflect current
procurement requirements and practices.
• MSU did not publish the solicitations and/or awards for procurements over
$100,000 as required. For example, our review of 14 competitive
procurements totaling $69.3 million (each over $100,000), disclosed that
MSU did not publish the solicitations and/or awards for 8 procurements
totaling $37.4 million. MSU’s Procurement Policies and Procedures require
publishing of solicitations and notice of the related award (for example on
MSU’s Procurement Office Bid Board and/or eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage) for contracts that exceed $100,000. Publication of contract
solicitations and awards helps ensure that goods and services are procured in
the most cost advantageous manner and promotes transparency.
The failure to publish the solicitations and awards is significant because 3 of
these procurements were awarded based on a single proposal/bid, including 2
totaling $6.3 million for which neither the solicitation or award were
published and 1 totaling $3.4 million for which the award was not published.
• MSU did not obtain required BPW approval for 1 procurement for security
services totaling $1.3 million, and for 12 change orders for dining and catering
services that effectively increased the contract’s original term amount by
$22.1 million. For example, in May 2020, BPW approved the dining and
catering services contract totaling $45 million for the original contract term of
June 1, 2020 to May 31, 2025, however MSU incurred and paid for
expenditures totaling $63.2 million during this period. MSU issued 7 change
orders so invoices could be paid, however MSU never obtained BPW
approval or disclosed the increase in expenditures. MSU procurement
personnel advised the increase in expenditures and need for change orders was
as a result of the increase to student enrollment, and did not believe BPW
14

--- Page 17 ---
approval was needed once the original amounts were approved. However,
State procurement law requires BPW approval for contracts and modifications
valued over $1 million.
• MSU did not secure vendor proposals and bids submitted and stored
electronically. For three competitive sealed proposal procurements tested
totaling $36.6 million relating to construction services, MSU specifically
directed vendors to submit their proposal and bid documents directly to a
procurement officer’s email account. Our review disclosed that MSU did not
require the vendors to password protect the documents, and MSU did not
document for all three procurements that the proposals were opened by at least
two MSU employees. Consequently, bid/proposal information could be
accessed prior to opening date and improperly disclosed to other prospective
candidates without detection. MSU’s Procurement Policies and Procedures
require that bids and proposals are maintained in a secure place until opening,
and that the procurement officer ensure appropriate procedures are in place for
the opening of proposals.
• MSU did not submit annual reports to the Governor and General Assembly as
required by State law listing all sole source, emergency and expedited
procurements exceeding $100,000. According to agency records, MSU
awarded 87 purchase orders totaling $59.6 million between May 1, 2021 and
June 30, 2025 that should have been reported.
These conditions were caused, at least in part, because MSU’s Procurement
Policies and Procedures, last approved by MSU’s Board of Regents and BPW in
2005, did not accurately reflect current procurement requirements (such as the
dollar thresholds for the type of procurements and approval requirements) and
processes. During the previous audit MSU management advised that new
procurement policies and procedures would be presented by December 2022 to
the Board of Regents and BPW.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSU
a. ensure that all applicable solicitations and contract awards are published,
b. obtain BPW approval for contracts and change orders over $1 million,
c. ensure contract proposals and bids are adequately secured prior to being
opened,
d. submit the required annual procurement report to the Governor and
General Assembly, and
e. update the Procurement Policies and Procedures to reflect current
procurement requirements and practices.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 3
MSU did not always ensure invoices were properly supported, goods and
services were received, and did not always pay vendors timely.
Analysis
MSU did not always ensure invoices were properly supported, goods and services
were received, and did not always pay vendors timely.
• MSU paid for goods and services without ensuring that payments were proper
and related goods and services were received. Specifically, our test of 56
invoices totaling $21 million9 disclosed that MSU paid 5 invoices totaling
$583,000 prior to the related goods or services being received, including 3
totaling $267,900 for which the goods and services still had not been received
as of October 2025. In addition, for 4 other invoices totaling $297,400, MSU
did not have adequate documentation to support amounts invoiced and paid
were consistent with the related contracts. For example, MSU paid a
$166,100 invoice for unarmed security services in May 2025 and either did
not retain or could not locate documentation (such as daily logs of hours and
locations worked) to support these charges.
• MSU did not appear to always pay vendors timely. Specifically, we analyzed
fiscal years 2022 through 2025 payments recorded on State and MSU
accounting records and noted that 19 percent of invoices were paid from 60
days10 to more than one year from the date of the invoice. According to MSU
management, the untimely payments were generally the result of vendors not
submitting invoices to the accounts payable unit, and the departments
responsible for review not submitting approved invoices to the accounts
payable unit timely. However, MSU did not record the dates invoices were
received and accordingly we could not verify these assertions.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual
requires agencies to document that the services have been rendered prior to
payment. The Manual further requires that invoices be stamped with the date the
invoice was received, and the date goods or services were received. In addition,
State regulations require agencies to submit the invoices to the Comptroller of
Maryland within 25 days of receipt so that they can be paid within 30 days of
receipt, as required by State law.
9 We selected payments for testing based on materiality that included a variety of goods and
services such as equipment, housing, consulting, security, and construction activity.
10 Our analysis used the date of invoice to payment to evaluate the timeliness and therefore we
allowed for 60 days to be conservative.
16

--- Page 19 ---
A similar condition regarding insufficient verification of vendor billings was
included in our two preceding audit reports dating back to January 2019. In
response to the September 2022 report, MSU indicated it would enhance policies
and procedures to confirm and document proper receipt and acceptance of related
goods and services by December 2022.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSU
a. verify that all goods and services have been received, and obtain adequate
support to ensure amounts invoiced and paid are proper and consistent
with the related contract (repeat);
b. ensure invoices are stamped with the date the invoice was received; and
c. pay vendors in a timely manner.
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 4
MSU did not ensure that criminal background checks were completed for
certain contractors, resulting in one individual with a previous conviction for
possession of narcotics with intent to distribute working on campus.
Analysis
MSU did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure criminal background
checks were properly completed for dining and catering services and unarmed
security guard vendor11 employees. According to agency records, as of October
2025, there were 244 dining and catering services and 186 unarmed security
vendor employees assigned to MSU. The dining and catering services contract
required the vendor to obtain and submit the results of the background checks and
although MSU did not have a written contract with the unarmed security vendor,
we were advised by MSU management that the vendor was expected to perform
background checks of its employees.12
Our review disclosed that MSU could not document its review of background
checks for the dining and catering services vendor, and did not attempt to obtain
the results from the unarmed security guard vendor. MSU also did not require or
obtain ongoing updates (referred to as alerts) of subsequent criminal activity for
either vendor. In response to our request, MSU contacted the dining and catering
11 The unarmed security guard vendor was discussed in Finding 1.
12 Our comparison to unarmed security guard contracts at other State agencies including a
university had a similar requirement for background checks described in the dining and catering
services contract above.
17

--- Page 20 ---
services vendor who advised that background checks were performed for all 10
employees tested but could only provide documentation for 6 of 10 employees.
The vendor indicated that they no longer had documentation of the background
checks for the remaining 4 employees due to their document retention practices.
For the unarmed security guard vendor, we obtained a list of employees assigned
to MSU as of October 2025 and matched these individuals against Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services conviction records for the period
September 2019 to April 2024. Our match identified one vendor employee that
was assigned to work at MSU who was convicted of possession of narcotics with
intent to distribute in April 2023. MSU was not aware of the conviction before
we brought it to their attention. As a result, the employee was still working at
MSU as of October 2025 based on the vendor’s assignment roster. Upon being
notified, MSU and the vendor investigated this matter that resulted in the
immediate termination of the vendor’s employee in December 2025.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSU
a. ensure the dining services and unarmed security guard vendors obtain
criminal background checks for all employees, including the four
employees noted above;
b. require the dining services and unarmed security guard vendors to
receive alerts of subsequent criminal activity by their employees and
timely report such activity to MSU; and
c. take appropriate action for any vendor employees with criminal
backgrounds.
Payroll
Finding 5
MSU did not ensure that employees who were terminated or left State service
were promptly removed from the payroll, resulting in improper payments to
at least eight former employees totaling approximately $150,000.
Analysis
MSU did not ensure that employees who were terminated or left State service
were removed timely from the payroll. According to State records, during the
period from May 1, 2021 to June 30, 2025, there were 598 employees terminated
from MSU. We obtained a Statewide Personnel System (SPS) report of MSU
employee terminations processed during this period and compared the termination
date entered in SPS to the date that the termination was processed in SPS which
18

--- Page 21 ---
identified 264 employees whose terminations were processed one or more days
after the termination date.
We reviewed 14 of these employees with delays between the effective date of the
termination and the SPS termination date ranging from 37 days to more than 12
months, and that appeared to have regular earning payments subsequent to their
termination date. Our review disclosed that the untimely processing of the
terminations resulted in 8 employees receiving improper payments totaling
approximately $150,000 subsequent to their termination date.
MSU was unaware of 6 of these employees, and had not taken action to recover
the improper payments which totaled approximately $95,000. For another
employee, MSU identified approximately $51,000 in payments made for seven
months after the employee retired in June 2023 but as of November 2025, had not
recovered approximately $48,000 of these funds. The remaining employee was
paid approximately $4,000 after leaving State service which was recovered in
November 2022, six months after the payment was made.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSU
a. implement procedures to ensure timely posting in SPS of employees who
are terminated; and
b. investigate payments to employees after termination, including those
noted above, and in consultation with legal counsel pursue recovery of
any improper payments as deemed appropriate.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Finding 6 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance
and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MSU’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Morgan State University (MSU)
for the period beginning May 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2025. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, construction,
grants, student accounts receivable, financial aid, cash receipts, payroll, and
information systems security and control. We also determined the status of
findings in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MSU’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MSU.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2025, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSU’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
20

--- Page 23 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from MSU’s financial system for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as payroll, purchases, disbursements, financial aid, and student
accounts receivable. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSU, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding has been
communicated to MSU and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MSU’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MSU regarding the results of our review of its
response.
22

--- Page 25 ---
APPENDIX
Office of the President
February 6, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
I have enclosed Morgan State University’s responses to your draft report for the audit period
beginning May 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2025. We appreciate the collaboration and
recommendations your team has provided.
Kind Regards,
David K. Wilson
President
Enclosure
cc: The Honorable Kweisi Mfume, Chairman, Board of Regents
General Larry R. Ellis, Vice-Chairman and Chair of the Audit Committee, Board of Regents
Shirley M. Malcom, Ph.D., Chair, Finance and Facilities Committee, Board of Regents
Mr. E. David LaChina, Executive Vice President and CFO for Finance and Administration
Mr. Vinnie A. John, Associate Vice President and COO for Finance and Administration
Ms. Deborah A. Flavin, Associate Vice President for Finance and Administration
Dr. Hongtao Yu, Provost and Senior Vice President for Academic Affairs
Dr. Kara M. Turner, Senior Vice President for Enrollment Management and Student Success
Dr. Timothy Summers, Vice President for Technology and CIO
Dr. Letitia Williams, Interim Vice President for Student Affairs
Dr. Don-Terry Veal, Vice President, State and Federal Relations and Chief of Staff
Mr. Abraham Mauer, Director for the Office of Internal Audit and Management Review
1700 E. Cold Spring Lane • 400 Truth Hall • Baltimore, MD 21251 • (443) 885-3200 • Fax (443) 885-8296
Maryland's Preeminent Public Urban Research University

--- Page 26 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 1
MSU continued to obtain unarmed security guard services under an expired
emergency contract from March 2016 without seeking subsequent
competition. In addition, MSU could not support the hourly rates billed by
the vendor.
We recommend that MSU
a. competitively procure and execute contracts in accordance with its
policies and procedures (repeat);
b. obtain BPW approval as required, including retroactive approval for the
unarmed security guard services noted above (repeat); and
c. evaluate hourly rates being billed for unarmed security guard services,
and take appropriate action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide While the University recognizes the concerns identified with the historical
additional comments as administration of unarmed security guard services, significant corrective
deemed necessary. actions and procurement reforms have been implemented to remedy these
issues. These include ongoing staff training, streamlining workflows,
implementing standard operating procedures, and using templates and
documentation tools to ensure consistent compliance, transparency, and
sound procurement practices across the University.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/17/2025
Please provide details of While the University had made multiple attempts during the audit period
corrective action or to competitively award unarmed security guard services, these attempts
explain disagreement. were canceled due to procedural challenges (IFB 22-PRO-0025-S and
RFP 23-PRO-0018-S). However, in December 2025, MSU resolved this
condition by competitively awarding a cooperative agreement approved
by BPW on November 19, 2025, leveraging a National Association of
State Procurement Officials (NASPO) ValuePoint vehicle that fully
complies with State and MSU procurement laws and policies. This action
directly addressed every element of the finding by replacing the expired
contract with a competitively sourced and fully compliant agreement.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/03/2025
Page 1 of 12

--- Page 27 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of On December 3, 2025, BPW granted retroactive approval for the unarmed
corrective action or security guard services for the period 7/1/2023 through 11/20/2025. As
explain disagreement. noted in Recommendation a, BPW approved a competitively awarded
contract for Unarmed Security Guard Services on 11/19/2025.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/03/2025
Please provide details of As part of the NASPO negotiation and award process, MSU conducted a
corrective action or thorough cost and price analysis, including benchmarking and negotiating
explain disagreement. labor rates most favorable to the State of Maryland and the University.
This was documented in the NASPO contract negotiation memo and will
be used to monitor hourly rates and invoicing on an ongoing basis.
Page 2 of 12

--- Page 28 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MSU did not always publish solicitations and/or awards, obtain BPW
approval, secure vendor proposals and bids submitted and stored
electronically, and submit certain required annual reports. In addition,
MSU’s Procurement Policies and Procedures had not been updated since 2005
and did not accurately reflect current procurement requirements and
practices.
We recommend that MSU
a. ensure that all applicable solicitations and contract awards are published,
b. obtain BPW approval for contracts and change orders over $1 million,
c. ensure contract proposals and bids are adequately secured prior to being
opened,
d. submit the required annual procurement report to the Governor and
General Assembly, and
e. update the Procurement Policies and Procedures to reflect current
procurement requirements and practices.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/2025
Please provide details of The University has updated and enhanced the functionality of its
corrective action or electronic procurement bid board, now consistently publishing all
explain disagreement. applicable solicitations and awards there and/or on the eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) portal. Please note that factors such as
procurement category, method, and dollar threshold guide which tool is
used. For a time during the audit period, the University relied on
contacting multiple vendors directly, after extensive research to identify
as many organizations as possible that offer the necessary goods and
services, to solicit proposals and notify bidders of awards. The University
has now expanded its procedures to post solicitations and awards on
public-facing websites in accordance with its approved policy, thereby
promoting greater competition and strengthening compliance, as
recommended.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/30/2026
Page 3 of 12

--- Page 29 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The University’s understanding of the guidance received from BPW
corrective action or regarding successive change orders requiring approval is the reason BPW
explain disagreement. was not sought. The auditors obtained written clarification from BPW that
this approval is required, and the University will ensure it is secured in
such instances going forward.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2026
Please provide details of The University will:
corrective action or
explain disagreement. ● Standardize the method for submitting and receiving competitive
sealed bids and proposals via a secure electronic procurement
platform or a secure file-transfer method that requires encryption
and password protection, with passwords transmitted separately.
● Update the solicitation instructions to explicitly require vendors to
password-protect all electronic bid and proposal documents.
● Implement documented dual-control opening procedures that
require all competitive sealed bids and proposals to be officially
opened by at least two authorized employees, evidencing the date
and time of opening, names and titles of employees present, and
confirmation that proposals remained secure until the official
opening.
● Update procedures to include explicit guidance on electronic bid
submission, security controls, and documentation standards,
ensuring alignment with evolving electronic procurement
practices.
● Train procurement staff on secure electronic procurement
practices and documentation requirements. Additionally,
supervisory reviews will be enhanced to verify compliance with
bid security and opening procedures prior to contract award.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2026
Please provide details of The University will submit the required reports annually, as
corrective action or recommended. Please note that the University was unaware of these
explain disagreement. specific reporting requirements and regularly submits various reports to
multiple agencies. Furthermore, we were advised that the Department of
General Services (DGS), which oversees and facilitates procurement
reporting for the State of Maryland, was unaware that higher education
institutions are required to submit these specific reports, and that peer
higher education institutions were similarly unaware. In any event, this
will be corrected immediately.
Recommendation 2e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/2026
Page 4 of 12

--- Page 30 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The University is iteratively updating the procurement policy and
corrective action or procedures (P&P) document and plans to submit the final draft version to
explain disagreement. senior management and counsel for internal review and approval. Once
the internal management approval process is finalized, we will submit the
P&P document to the Board of Regents and BPW for approval.
Page 5 of 12

--- Page 31 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MSU did not always ensure invoices were properly supported, goods and
services were received, and did not always pay vendors timely.
We recommend that MSU
a. verify that all goods and services have been received, and obtain adequate
support to ensure amounts invoiced and paid are proper and consistent
with the related contract (repeat);
b. ensure invoices are stamped with the date the invoice was received; and
c. pay vendors in a timely manner.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/2026
Please provide details of The University has developed a formal Contract Technical Representative
corrective action or (CTR) Guide to train end-users and contract administrators on their post-
explain disagreement. award responsibilities. The CTR Guide standardizes requirements for:
• Inspection and acceptance of goods and services
• Verification that deliverables meet contract terms
• Documentation of receipt prior to invoice approval
• Monitoring of contract performance
• Invoice review and validation
In addition, standardized templates have been created to ensure clear
visibility and documentation of the inspection and acceptance process
prior to approving invoices, providing an auditable trail that links receipt
of goods and services to payment authorization.
The University will develop and administer a robust training program to
ensure that the current Contract Technical Representatives comply with
the CTR Guide.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/2026
Page 6 of 12

--- Page 32 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Overall, the University’s process for approving invoices will be updated
corrective action or to include a dated received reference as well as a date authorized
explain disagreement. reference. In addition, the training program referenced above will
incorporate the requirement for CTRs to stamp the invoice with the date
it was physically received and/or attach or reference the email received
with the invoice.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/2026
Please provide details of
corrective action or The training program referenced above will emphasize the timely
explain disagreement. processing of vendor invoices. More specifically, the University will:
● Define and assign explicit responsibilities to the departmental
Contract Technical Representatives who will be held accountable
for reviewing, approving, documenting, and submitting invoices
to Accounts Payable in a timely manner.
● Provide targeted training to departmental staff on invoice
processing requirements, timeliness expectations, and
documentation standards.
Page 7 of 12

--- Page 33 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 4
MSU did not ensure that criminal background checks were completed for
certain contractors, resulting in one individual with a previous conviction for
possession of narcotics with intent to distribute working on campus.
We recommend that MSU
a. ensure the dining services and unarmed security guard vendors obtain
criminal background checks for all employees, including the four
employees noted above;
b. require the dining services and unarmed security guard vendors to
receive alerts of subsequent criminal activity by their employees and
timely report such activity to MSU; and
c. take appropriate action for any vendor employees with criminal
backgrounds.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/30/2026
Please provide details of The University will ensure that the dining services and unarmed security
corrective action or guard vendors obtain criminal background checks for all employees.
explain disagreement.
The University immediately contacted the unarmed security guard vendor
about the individual employee who failed the background check, and that
employee’s assignment was promptly terminated. Subsequently, the
vendor demonstrated to the University that it follows a rigorous
background check process in partnership with a third-party and the
Maryland State Police, and that the isolated incident was due to a clerical
error. The University agrees with the recommendation and will implement
a documented process to independently verify that the unarmed security
guard vendor conducts a proper criminal background check of its
employees assigned to MSU. The University will perform the same for
other vendors it identifies as necessary, based on a formal risk assessment.
Although the University’s process has always been to inspect the dining
service provider’s criminal background check records to ensure they are
Page 8 of 12

--- Page 34 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
completed properly, the method for evidencing this review and
documenting it was lacking. As a result of the audit, the University has
implemented a new form and now documents its review of the service
provider’s criminal background checks to ensure they are properly
performed by the vendor. The University will continue to do so going
forward.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/30/2026
Please provide details of Although the current dining service and unarmed security contracts do not
corrective action or require the vendors to receive and relay ongoing monitoring alerts to the
explain disagreement. University, we will work with those organizations to implement this
requirement going forward.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/30/2026
Please provide details of As noted above, the University immediately worked with the vendor and
corrective action or had the employee in question terminated. This represents an isolated
explain disagreement. incident and is not expected to recur. In the unlikely event that an
employee with a failed background check is discovered, the University
will take swift remedial action, as recommended by the auditors.
Page 9 of 12

--- Page 35 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 5
MSU did not ensure that employees who were terminated or left State service
were promptly removed from the payroll, resulting in improper payments to
at least eight former employees totaling approximately $150,000.
We recommend that MSU
a. implement procedures to ensure timely posting in SPS of employees who
are terminated; and
b. investigate payments to employees after termination, including those
noted above, and in consultation with legal counsel pursue recovery of
any improper payments as deemed appropriate.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2026
Please provide details of As a result of the audit, the University will implement the following
corrective action or procedures to reduce the risk of overpayments to an acceptable level.
explain disagreement. ● Publish formal employee separation guidance, which requires
immediate notification to HR of terminations, resignations,
retirements, and non-renewals.
● Track and report on the average difference between the last day
worked and HR notification date for follow-up action and
escalation, as warranted.
● For non-faculty employees, payment is not issued without an
approved timesheet. Access to timesheets for terminated
employees is promptly revoked.
● Monitor SPS posting lags and test corresponding payments for
appropriateness and accuracy on a test basis.
● Require department chairs to regularly certify that faculty
employees listed are active and no known separations are pending.
The frequency will be determined and established.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2026
Page 10 of 12

--- Page 36 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of One of the eight former employees cited above has returned the
corrective action or overpayment. The University is in the process of finalizing the collection
explain disagreement. procedures and will initiate collection for the seven individuals and will
make all necessary efforts to ensure that the overpayments are repaid in
accordance with the Maryland State Central Collection Unit’s (CCU)
Standards for Administrative Collection of Claims. Furthermore, the
University is conducting a second review of separated employees with a
significant SPS posting lag and final payout to ensure they are accurate.
Page 11 of 12

--- Page 37 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Finding 6 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following finding,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MSU’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, MSU’s responses indicated agreement
with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 12 of 12

--- Page 38 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam M. Auerback
Principal Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
John B. Wachter, CFE
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Karen J. Howes
Zain Khalid
Paul A. McGrew
Kristopher A. Miller
Malkah B. Safren
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditor