Title: Worcester County Public Schools
Date: 2026-02-23
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=699f3d403b3f3ca4a2ce3d4d
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:09:45.631124
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Worcester County Public Schools
February 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 23, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Worcester
County Public Schools (WCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether WCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit identified several procurement and disbursement deficiencies, including
questionable procurement activity involving a management employee, which we
referred to the Office of the State Prosecutor (OSP). Due to the referral, we will
issue a separate audit report with the procurement and disbursement findings at a
later date. A referral to the OSP does not mean that a criminal act has actually
occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
Our audit also disclosed that WCPS did not always perform a newly required
screening for positions involving direct contact with minors. Specifically, WCPS
had not performed the screening as of October 3, 2025 for 6 of the 10 employees
tested who had been employed for periods ranging from 39 to 450 days.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under

--- Page 4 ---
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit disclosed that certain elements used to determine payment
amounts to bus contractors could not be supported or did not consider available
fuel tax credits. Also, WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its
third-party administrator that provides health care claims processing services.
These conditions were commented on in our prior report but not corrected.
WCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of WCPS’ response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to our findings and
related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by WCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 9
External Audits 10
Cybersecurity Incident 11
Questionable Procurement Activity 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 14
Revenue and Billing Cycle 14
Federal Funds 15
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle 16
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 1 – Worcester County Public Schools (WCPS) did not always 17
perform a newly required screening for positions involving direct
contact with minors.
Equipment Control and Accountability 18
Information Technology
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 18
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 18
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 18
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 19
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 19
Transportation Services
* Finding 6 – Certain elements of bus contract payments could not be 20
supported or did not consider available fuel tax credits.
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Food Services 21
School Board Oversight 21
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 7 – WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its 23
third-party administrator to verify the propriety of amounts paid and
compliance with performance measures.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 24
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Worcester County Public Schools (WCPS)
ranks 18th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2024 full-time student enrollment was 6,848 students. WCPS had 14
schools, consisting of 5 elementary, 1 intermediate, 3 middle, 3 high schools, and
2 other types of schools (including vocational and special).
Funding
WCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Worcester County, the
State, and federal government. According to the WCPS' audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $170.7 million in
fiscal year 2024, including $37.8 million from the State. See Figure 1 for WCPS’
enrollment and funding by source for the six-year period from fiscal year 2019
through fiscal year 2024. See Figure 2 for revenue sources per enrolled student in
fiscal year 2024 according to its audited financial statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
WCPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2019 through 2024
(dollar amounts in millions)
6,882
6,848
6,810
6,841
6,803
6,711
$121
$112
$102 $101 $103
$93
$33 $31 $29 $34 $34 $38 $30
$18 $20
$10 $9 $11
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Enrollment Local State Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2024 included:
• $27.4 million for Foundation Formula Grants
• $6.7 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
• $3.7 million for Other State funding
Source: WCPS’ Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
WCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2024
Other
$612
2%
Federal
$3,615
15%
State Local
$5,395 $14,756
22% 61%
Source: WCPS’ Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education system to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty Aid, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides
additional funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as,
Prekindergarten Aid).
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Expenditures
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2024 expenditures
were approximately $172 million. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 72 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2024. According to MSDE records, during
the 2023-2024 school year, WCPS had 1,255 full-time equivalent positions,
which consisted of 916 instructional and 339 non-instructional. Instruction
accounted for 61 percent of WCPS' expenditures on a categorical basis (see
Figure 3).
Figure 3
WCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2024
(dollar amounts in millions)
Instruction $104.3
61%
Facilities & Capital Projects $20.0
12%
Administration & Support $19.1 Enrollment
11% 6,848
Special Education $15.7
9% Employees
Transportation $8.4 1,255
4%
Cost Per Pupil
Food Service $4.4
$25,119
3%
Source: WCPS' Fiscal Year 2024 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
8

--- Page 11 ---
Oversight
WCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and three non-voting student members. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of WCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with WCPS to comply with
the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Worcester County
government also exercises authority over WCPS primarily through the review and
approval of WCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a seven-member
Board appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
Board Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker
of the House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, MSDE, and the Interagency Commission on School
Construction. Specifically, the law provides that the OIGE may receive and
investigate information and complaints concerning potential fraud, waste, and
abuse of public funds and property; civil rights violations involving students or
employees; whether policies and procedures governing the prevention and
reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with applicable federal and State
laws; and compliance with other applicable federal and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
9

--- Page 12 ---
review, the OIGE issued two public reports related to WCPS reviews and
investigations. We considered these reports during our current audit.
External Audits
As required by State law, WCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of WCPS as of June 30, 2019, 2020,
2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024, and the respective changes in its financial position
and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
WCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of WCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independent audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
WCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide
assurance to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place,
and the entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2019 through 2024 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2024 audits, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the
following areas:
• State and local government revenues received via electronic fund transfer
• Accounts receivable
• Federal grant activity
10

--- Page 13 ---
Cybersecurity Incident
On December 28, 2024, a WCPS vendor became aware of a cybersecurity
incident involving the unauthorized transfers of current and former student and
educator personal information. The breach effected numerous vendor customers
including other Maryland school districts. Compromised information included
names, contact information, birthdates, medical information, and social security
numbers. The vendor had obtained an independent review over its controls in
2024 and its related System and Organization Controls report did not identify any
significant operational or security-related concerns.
WCPS learned their information was involved in the breach on January 7, 2025
and alerted the students and educators about the security breach on January 10,
2025. The vendor also reached out directly to individuals affected by the breach
and is offering credit monitoring services to those impacted.
On March 7, 2025, the vendor released an investigation report sharing attack
details and explaining the type of data that was breached. We determined that all
the WCPS student and educator records were included in the data breach
including personally identifiable information records.
Questionable Procurement Activity
During our fieldwork, we identified questionable purchases by a management
employee which we referred to the Office of the State Prosecutor (OSP). A
referral to the OSP does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that
criminal charges will be filed.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, WCPS obtained an
exemption on December 6, 2016 from the 6-year audit cycle covering fiscal years
2017 to 2022. Therefore, our most recent audit report was dated June 6, 2017.
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 16 of the 19
findings contained in the June 6, 2017 report. The status of three of these findings
related to purchasing activity and will be addressed in the above noted separate
audit report. See Figure 4 for the results of our review.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Adequate accountability and control over cash receipts
had not been established. For example, collections were Not repeated
Finding 1
not recorded upon receipt and there was no independent (Not followed up on)
verification that certain collections were deposited.
Finding 2 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 6 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
WCPS had not established comprehensive equipment
Finding 7 policies, and appropriate controls and recordkeeping Not repeated
requirements.
Finding 8 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 9 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 10 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 11 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
WCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing
Finding 12 procedures and did not periodically perform a system- Not repeated
wide analysis of bus routes to maximize efficiency.
WCPS had not established a formal methodology to
calculate its per vehicle allotment rate, and payments to Repeated
Finding 13
bus contractors included elements that did not consider (Current Finding 6)
market conditions, actual costs, or available discounts.
WCPS did not ensure the accuracy of contractor
Finding 14 reported manifest mileage, which was used to compute Not repeated
certain payments to bus contractors.
Internal controls over payments to bus contractors were
Finding 15 not adequate, as there was no independent review and Not repeated
approval of payment calculations.
WCPS had not established adequate accountability and Not repeated
Finding 16
control over school cafeteria cash receipts. (Not followed up on)
2 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
have been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Financial disclosure statements were not always filed or
Finding 17 Not repeated
filed timely, as required.
WCPS had not pursued the competitive procurement of
its healthcare contracts for administrative services and
Finding 18 Not repeated
stop-loss coverage since 1967 and did not receive copies
or obtain Board approval of the annual agreements.
WCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and
retiree health care claims paid, and did not verify that Repeated
Finding 19
stop-loss insurance was correctly applied and plan (Current Finding 7)
administrative fees were properly charged.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Worcester County Public Schools (WCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Worcester County, the State, and the federal government.
According to WCPS' audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled approximately $170.7 million in fiscal year 2024, including $37.8 million
from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited WCPS' financial statements and the
objectives of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this
work to provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received
via electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor's
procedural review (related to the fiscal year 2024 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2024, school
activity collections totaled approximately $3.1 million and the June 30, 2024 fund
balance was $1.5 million. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of
this activity, we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Federal Funds
Background
WCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to WCPS' Single Audit, fiscal year
2024 (latest available at time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled $19.7
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid
reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $7.7 million in fiscal year 2020 to $19.7 million in
fiscal year 2024 (156 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
Specifically, according to WCPS' records, as of June 30, 2024, WCPS was
awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $27.8 million to be
distributed over fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental
Appropriations Act, and the American Rescue Plan.
As of June 30, 2024, according to WCPS records, expenditures related to these
COVID-19 grants totaled $25.2 million, from March 2020 to June 2024 and were
primarily comprised of staffing, instructional software and materials, and laptops.
WCPS advised us that it had expended all funds as of March 28, 2025.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of WCPS' federal grants and the objectives of our
audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on WCPS compliance with
the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2019 through 2024. Our review of
the Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in this
report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
WCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to WCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
15

--- Page 18 ---
The Maryland State Department of Education’s (MSDE) Interagency Medicaid
Monitoring Team issued a report in July 2024 of the results of its review of 50
student case files for 78 criteria. The report did not specifically address the
propriety of Medicaid billing but overall concluded that WCPS was generally
compliant with most criteria. For example, WCPS was 100 percent compliant
with 75 criteria and from 90 to 99 percent compliant with 3 criteria.
According to audited financial statements, fiscal year 2024 state and federal
reimbursements for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately
$773,000, which was an increase of approximately $539,000 from the previous
fiscal year. Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to
our audit objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized
services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in the federal fund area, including policies, procedures and controls
with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Audit Coverage
Our audit identified several procurement and disbursement deficiencies, including
questionable procurement activity involving a management employee, which we
referred to the Office of the State Prosecutor (OSP). Due to the referral, we will
issue a separate audit report with the procurement and disbursement findings at a
later date. A referral to the OSP does not mean that a criminal act has actually
occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the WCPS budget.
According to WCPS' records, fiscal year 2024 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $123 million, representing 72 percent of total expenditures.
According to MSDE reports, during the 2023-2024 school year, WCPS had 1,255
full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 916 instructional and 339 non-
instructional positions.
16

--- Page 19 ---
WCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
Finding 1
WCPS did not always perform a newly required screening for positions
involving direct contact with minors.
Analysis
WCPS did not always perform the required screening for positions involving
direct contact with minors (such as, care, supervision, guidance, or control of, or
routine interaction with). State law effective July 1, 2019 (and updated July 1,
2021) requires local education agencies to provide screening of certain applicants.
Specifically, the schools must obtain information from an applicant for positions
that involve direct contact with a minor, including a written statement whether
they were the subject of a child sexual abuse or sexual misconduct investigation
by any employer that resulted in a finding.3 The law also requires local education
agencies to contact the applicant’s current or prior employers and obtain the same
information.
According to WCPS’ records, during fiscal year 2025, WCPS hired 317
individualsthat were assigned to schools or student programs that would have
contact with minors. We arbitrarily tested 10 employees hired after the
aforementioned law went into effect. Our test disclosed that WCPS had not
performed the screening for 6 of these employees who had been employed for
periods ranging from 39 to 450 days as of October 3, 2025. In addition, 2
screenings were performed 73 to 392 days after employment. Without a proper
screening, WCPS lacks assurance regarding the conduct of the individuals it
hired.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCPS comply with State law and perform and
document the required screening for positions involving direct contact with
minors, including those noted above.
3 This is in addition to existing requirements to obtain a criminal background check.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to WCPS' audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, vehicles, and equipment) totaled
$15.4 million as of June 30, 2024. WCPS maintains centralized automated
records for all equipment including assets with a cost of $5,000 or more that are
capitalized for financial statement purposes. Control and recordkeeping of laptop
computers and tablets assigned to schools, students, and employees was
maintained in a database by the Department of Information Technology regardless
of cost. WCPS has established written equipment policies.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of WCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for
equipment. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 2
through 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with WCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
WCPS employs a staff of 106 employees to maintain its 14 schools and an
administrative and support office. According to WCPS’ fiscal year 2026 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to WCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated to cost
$190.6 million.
Our review of nine construction-related procurements (selected based on
materiality) awarded during fiscal years 2022 through 2025 totaling
approximately $18.1 million disclosed various issues with WCPS purchasing
policy and procedures and certain of these procurements that will be addressed in
the aforementioned separate report. In addition, our test of 18 invoices totaling
$7.7 million for these contracts, disclosed that the invoices were properly
reviewed and approved, and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with the
related contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
WCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, WCPS provides scheduled maintenance of
its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing emergency repairs. In
addition, WCPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore area
entities to purchase energy at the best possible terms. WCPS also utilizes a
vendor energy management program to monitor and control heating and air
conditioning usage and a utility billing management system to monitor related
costs.
WCPS also has written policies that include best practices that encourage both
students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use, and monitors
building energy on a centralized basis. According to consortium records (which
we did not audit), WCPS saved approximately $1 million through energy cost
avoidance from fiscal years 2015 to 2024.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of WCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for facilities
19

--- Page 22 ---
construction, renovations, and maintenance. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by MSDE, WCPS had approximately 6,300
students eligible to receive student transportation services during fiscal year 2024.
These students were transported using 69 contractor-owned buses. WCPS
reported that 1.7 million route miles were traveled to transport students for the
2023-2024 school year. According to WCPS’ records, fiscal year 2024
transportation costs totaled approximately $8.4 million, of which $7.3 million
(approximately 87 percent) were payments for contracted bus services for various
costs.
Finding 6
Certain elements of bus contract payments could not be supported or did not
consider available fuel tax credits.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors could not
be supported or did not consider available fuel tax credits. For example, our
review of the contract payments disclosed the following conditions.
• WCPS could not support the propriety of the estimated $1.8 million it paid to
bus contractors for per-mile bus maintenance costs ($1.072 per mile) during
fiscal year 2024. This rate is intended to fund the expenses incurred by the
bus contractors for maintaining the bus, however no cost data was compiled
and analyzed to determine what should be reimbursed to the contractors.
• WCPS did not exclude federal excise and State fuel taxes from payments to
bus contractors. WCPS pays contractors for fuel usage using a monthly
average of diesel fuel prices, including taxes, and dividing by a miles per
gallon rate established by WCPS. However, according to federal and State
law, WCPS contractors are exempt from the federal excise tax and State fuel
tax and are able to receive a credit for fuel taxes paid when they file their
income tax returns. If WCPS had considered the exemption amount in its
calculation, payments to the contractors would have been approximately $1
million lower for fiscal years 2020 through 2024.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, WCPS indicated that it would consider actual costs in
determining maintenance rates and consider excluding fuel excise taxes.
However, as noted above, WCPS did not implement the stated corrective actions.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that WCPS
a. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs or otherwise develop supportable cost
estimates as the basis for per mile maintenance costs (repeat), and
b. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments (repeat).
Food Services
Background
According to WCPS' audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $4.4 million in fiscal year 2024, and were primarily funded
with federal and State funds totaling $3.9 million. The federal funds are received
from the United States Department of Agriculture based on an established rate per
meals served. WCPS is allowed to retain federal funds it receives in excess of its
annual food service operating costs to be used to offset certain future food service
operating costs. According to WCPS' audited financial statements, the balance in
WCPS' Food Services Fund totaled approximately $1.7 million as of June 30,
2024.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to Food Services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Worcester County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of seven
elected members and three non-voting student members. The Board contracted
with a certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits of the
WCPS financial statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight of
various areas of WCPS operation and governance, the Board has established an
21

--- Page 24 ---
Ethics Panel and School Advisory Committees (one at each school), which are
structured groups that provide advice to the school system on certain issues.
WCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both
Board members and WCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (such as supervisors) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, WCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and WCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar years 2023 and 2024 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
WCPS obtains its healthcare services through the Worcester County Government
(WCG). WCPS is self-insured for healthcare costs up to a designated stop-loss
amount ($300,000 per WCPS participant per plan year). Specifically, WCG
procures the services of a third-party administrator (TPA) for health care claims
processing services for employee and retiree medical (including vision), dental,
and prescription coverage, and for stop-loss insurance coverage. The TPA bills
WCPS monthly subscription charges based on the number of participants and
their medical coverage. Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays
them on behalf of WCPS. WCPS pays its TPA an administrative fee for these
services.
As of June 30, 2024, WCPS provided health insurance benefits to 1,177 enrolled
employees, dependents, and retirees. According to WCPS' records, healthcare
expenditures totaled approximately $20.3 million, including administrative fees
22

--- Page 25 ---
totaling $632,400, and stop-loss insurance coverage totaling $1.6 million for
fiscal year 2024.
Finding 7
WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA to verify the
propriety of amounts paid and compliance with performance measures.
Analysis
WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA to verify the
propriety of amounts paid and compliance with performance measures.
• WCPS did not verify that administrative fees and monthly subscription fees
billed by the TPA for medical coverage, agreed with its payroll records for
enrolled employees. In addition, the monthly premium rates charged (health
plan cost per person) for the various medical coverage categories and stop-
loss insurance were not verified for agreement with the related contracts. Our
review, based on the listed participant counts on certain monthly invoices and
the related contract rates, did not disclose significant variances.
• WCPS did not audit, or otherwise verify, the accuracy of TPA self-reported
compliance with performance measures. The TPA healthcare contract
included 6 performance measures relating to enrollment timeliness, customer
service, and claims processing. Additionally, the contract allowed for the
assessment of penalties up to $102,048 annually, if the TPA did not meet the
performance measures. The TPA reported self-assessed penalties of $17,008
in fiscal year 2024 based on its reported compliance, but WCPS did not have a
process to verify the TPA’s reported compliance.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of detailed claims data and not comparing
its record of enrolled participants to invoices from the TPA was noted in our
preceding audit report. In response to that report, WCPS agreed to consider
implementing additional controls to verify amounts paid for health insurance.
However, as stated above, the controls were not implemented.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that WCPS
a. compare its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and contract
rates to determine the propriety of related administrative fees and
monthly subscription fees billed (repeat); and
b. establish a process to independently verify, at least annually, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Worcester County Public Schools
(WCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which generally
requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school systems to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management practices. In
accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, WCPS obtained an
exemption from the 6-year audit cycle covering fiscal years 2017 to 2022. This
performance audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the WCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the WCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of WCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in
accordance with the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas
included revenue and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements,4
human resources and payroll, equipment control, information technology security
and control, facilities, transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the
management of other risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on WCPS dated June 6, 2017, was
limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of
the 11 areas.
4 Conclusions related to audit coverage of procurement and disbursements will be included in a
separate audit report.
24

--- Page 27 ---
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the WCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by WCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
WCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of WCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from January 1, 2023 to June 30, 2025
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
WCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data – including financial and operational – compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the WCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
WCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
25

--- Page 28 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to WCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
WCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to WCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from July 2025 to November 2025. WCPS’
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
26

--- Page 29 ---
Code of Maryland, we will advise WCPS regarding the results of our review of its
response.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Administration APPENDIX Board Members
ANNETTE E. WALLACE, Ed.D. TODD A. FERRANTE
Superintendent of Schools President
C. DWAYNE ABT, Ed.D. WILLIAM E. BUCHANAN
Chief Operations & Human Relations WORCESTER Vice-President
Officer
COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOLS JACKIE CUTLIP
MATTHEW J. RECORD, Ed.D.
Chief Safety & Academic Officer, Gr. �12 The Board of Education of Worcester County JON M. ANDES, Ed.D.
DENISE R. SHORTS 6270 Worcester Highway/ Newark, Maryland 21841 WILLIAM L. GORDY
Chief Academic Officer, Gr. PK-8
Telephone: (4IO) 632-5000 / Fax: (4IO) 632-0364 ELENA J. MCCOMAS
VINCENTE. TOLBERT, CPA www. wo rcesterk 12.or g
Chief Financial Officer DONALD C. SMACK, SR.
February 20, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
We are writing this letter to submit our responses to the Office of Legislative Audits' report
findings dated February 2026.
We have completed our responses on the enclosed Agency Response Form as provided to us
from your office.
Please acknowledge receipt so that we may ensure our responses have been accepted.
Regards,
Annette Wallace, Ed.D.
Superintendent of Schools

--- Page 31 ---
Worcester County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 1
WCPS did not always perform a newly required screening for positions
involving direct contact with minors.
We recommend that WCPS comply with State law and perform and
document the required screening for positions involving direct contact with
minors, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide WCPS recognizes the importance of this statutory requirement and
additional comments as shares the State’s commitment to ensuring student safety
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediate-
Ongoing
Please provide details of Effective immediately, WCPS has taken corrective action to ensure full
corrective action or compliance with State law requirements effective July 1, 2019, as
explain disagreement. amended July 1, 2021. Specifically, WCPS has reinforced Human
Resources hiring procedures to require completion and documentation of
the mandated screening for all applicants being considered for positions
involving direct contact with minors, including care, supervision,
guidance, control, or routine interaction.
WCPS will implement administrative oversight controls to ensure
compliance, including centralized review by Human Resources staff
before final employment clearance is granted. No applicant may be fully
cleared for assignment to a school or student program without
verification that the required screening has been completed or is actively
in progress in accordance with State guidance.
To further strengthen compliance, WCPS will provide additional training
and guidance to Human Resources staff to ensure consistent
understanding of statutory requirements and documentation
expectations. Human Resources Administrator and Administative
Assistant will periodically review hiring files for compliance and to
prevent recurrence.
WCPS believes these corrective actions fully address the audit
recommendation and will ensure sustained compliance with State law
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 32 ---
Worcester County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
while reinforcing its commitment to student safety and sound hiring
practices.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 33 ---
Worcester County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 2 through 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with WCPS’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, WCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 34 ---
Worcester County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 6
Certain elements of bus contract payments could not be supported or did not
consider available fuel tax credits.
We recommend that WCPS
a. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs or otherwise develop supportable cost
estimates as the basis for per mile maintenance costs (repeat), and
b. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
Please provide details of WCPS will work to obtain from Contractors actual maintenance costs as
corrective action or a basis for establishing contractor rates for per mile maintenance costs or
explain disagreement. otherwise develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for per mile
maintenance costs.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
Please provide details of WCPS will examine the procedure of excluding fuel excise taxes from
corrective action or Bus Contractor payments. Contractor rates are approved annually by our
explain disagreement. Board as part of the budget process. Any change including the exclusion
of fuel taxes would be subject to Board approval.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 35 ---
Worcester County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 7
WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA to verify the
propriety of amounts paid and compliance with performance measures.
We recommend that WCPS
a. compare its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and contract
rates to determine the propriety of related administrative fees and
monthly subscription fees billed (repeat); and
b. establish a process to independently verify, at least annually, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide WCPS concurs with the finding and recommendations. As referenced in
additional comments as background information, the TPA’s contractual relationship is with
deemed necessary. Worcester County Government. WCPS will work with our county
government to strengthen oversight and ensure compliance. Our
recommendations to our county government will be to implement the
corrective actions provided below.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
Please provide details of WCPS will meet and confer with its Third-Party Administrator (TPA) on
corrective action or a quarterly basis to compare WCPS enrollment records and applicable
explain disagreement. contract rates to TPA invoices, ensuring the accuracy and propriety of
administrative fees and monthly subscription fees billed.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept 2026
Please provide details of WCPS will establish a formal review process to independently assess the
corrective action or TPA’s compliance with required performance measures at least
explain disagreement. annually. Performance criteria will be reviewed at the beginning of the
plan year (September 1) and again at the close of the plan year (June 30),
with penalties assessed when contractual performance goals are not met.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 36 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Principal Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Stephanie A. Boateng
Jammie A. Brown
Kyle D. Howser
Kareem R. Jackson
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditors