Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Carroll County
Date: 2026-03-05
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=69af4352c12af773901c218d
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:09:27.985649
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Carroll County, Maryland
March 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 5, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Carroll County, Maryland for the period beginning December 13, 2021
and ending October 31, 2025. The Office oversees the administration of
decedents’ estates within Carroll County and assists individuals who administer
estates.
Our audit disclosed that the Office did not perform independent verifications of
collections to deposit, did not always deposit collections in a timely manner, and
did not segregate collection and accounts receivable duties, as required.
The Office’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our finding and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less the commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of Register of Wills for Carroll County, its
fiscal year 2025 gross receipts totaled $5,626,570, which consisted of inheritance
tax collections (net of commissions) of $3,923,108 and fees and commissions of
$1,703,462. As shown in Figure 1 on the following page, the Office’s fiscal year
2025 operating expenses totaled $1,112,605 (primarily salaries and wages), the
majority of which represents costs paid directly by the Comptroller, as noted
above.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Register of Wills for Carroll County
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Source
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 9
Vacant 0
Total 9
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 999,917
Operating Expenses 112,688
Total $1,112,605
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Source
Funding
Non-Budgeted Fund $5,626,570
Total $5,626,570
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated March 23, 2022. See Figure 2 for the results of our
review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Deposit verifications were not performed by personnel
Repeated
Finding 1 independent of the collection process, contributing to a
(Current Finding 1)
lack of accountability over collections.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office did not perform independent verifications of collections to
deposit, did not always deposit collections in a timely manner, and did not
segregate collection and accounts receivable duties, as required.
Analysis
The Office did not perform independent verifications of collections to deposit, did
not always deposit collections in a timely manner, and did not segregate
collection and accounts receivable duties, as required. According to the Office’s
records, during fiscal year 2025, collections totaled $5.6 million.
• The Office did not independently verify that all collections were deposited.
Specifically, the employee responsible for the verifications was not
independent since the employee had access to collections.
• The Office did not always deposit checks timely. Specifically, our test of
collections totaling $3.1 million (based on materiality) for 20 days during
November 2024 through August 2025 disclosed that checks totaling $716,700
were deposited 5 to 18 business days after receipt.
• The Office did not segregate collection and accounts receivable functions.
For example, two cashiers with responsibilities for collections could also
modify the related accounts receivable records.
As a result of these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could occur without
timely detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policies and
Procedures Manual requires independent verifications of collections to deposit
and timely deposit of collections within one working day of receipt. The Manual
also requires segregation of collections and accounts receivable functions.
A similar condition regarding access to collections by an employee involved in
the deposit verification process was noted in our two prior audit reports dating
back to May 2018. In its response to the preceding report, the Office agreed that
the employee performing the deposit verification would not have access to the
collections. However, as noted above, the proposed corrective action was not
implemented.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that an employee independent of the collection process performs
the deposit verifications (repeat),
b. deposit all collections in a timely manner, and
c. ensure that collections and accounts receivable duties are properly
segregated.
We advised the Office how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Carroll County, Maryland for the period beginning December 13, 2021
and ending October 31, 2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, disbursements, bank accounts, and
administration of estates. We also determined the status of the finding contained
in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services (such as human
resources, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided to the Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the
Comptroller. These support services are included within the scope of our audits
of the Office of the Comptroller.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
6

--- Page 9 ---
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 13, 2021 to October 31, 2025 but may include transactions
before or after this period, as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
7

--- Page 10 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Office’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 12 ---
Office of the Register of Wills – Carroll County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office did not perform independent verifications of collections to
deposit, did not always deposit collections in a timely manner, and did not
segregate collection and accounts receivable duties, as required.
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that an employee independent of the collection process performs
the deposit verifications (repeat),
b. deposit all collections in a timely manner, and
c. ensure that collections and accounts receivable duties are properly
segregated.
We advised the Office how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of We are ensuring that an employee, independent of the collection
corrective action or process, performs the deposit verifications. Changes already
explain disagreement. implemented
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of All collections are currently being deposited in a timely manner
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of All collections and accounts receivable duties are properly segregated
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Samantha J. Rhea
Staff Auditor