Title: Maryland State Library Agency
Date: 2026-03-10
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=69b178da71199531c6d2a8e8
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:09:19.584900
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Library Agency
March 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 10, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Library
Agency (MSLA) for the period beginning November 8, 2021 and ending October
31, 2025. MSLA is responsible for overseeing the Maryland State Library for the
Blind and Print Disabled (LBPD), Maryland public libraries, the State Library
Network, local library capital grants programs, and the Deaf Culture Digital
Library. MSLA also administers State and federal programs to improve library
services, operates the LBPD, coordinates the online electronic information
network that provides free internet access to Maryland residents, and oversees the
State Library Network where residents can obtain materials and services not
available at their local libraries.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MSLA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland State Library Agency (MSLA), was created by State law in 2017 as
an independent unit of State government under the direction of a 12-member
governing board (Maryland State Library Board). MSLA is responsible for
overseeing the Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled (LBPD),
Maryland public libraries, the State Library Network, local library capital grants
programs, and the Deaf Culture Digital Library. MSLA administers State and
federal programs to improve library services, operates the LBPD, approves plans
for the State Library and the Regional Resource Centers, coordinates the online
electronic information network that provides free internet access to Maryland
residents, and oversees the State Library Network where residents can obtain
materials and services not available at their local libraries.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2025, MSLA’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $104.8 million. These expenditures were
funded by State general funds totaling approximately $101.5 million and federal
funds totaling approximately $3.3 million. The majority of MSLA’s expenditures
represent grants to aid libraries throughout the State.
In addition, MSLA authorized disbursement of funds under the public library
capital grant program. According to the Department of Budget & Management’s
fiscal year 2026 Capital Budget White Book, MSLA had authorized capital
improvement projects with budgeted funds totaling approximately $42 million
during the period from July 2021 to June 2025. These funds were to provide
grants for acquiring land, designing, construction, and equipping public library
facilities. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2025, capital
expenditures totaled approximately $1.8 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated April 4, 2022. See Figure 1 for the results of our
review.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MSLA did not have an agreement with the Friends of
the Maryland Library for the Blind and Print
Finding 1 Not repeated
Disabled to address each entity’s role and
responsibilities.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MSLA’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to
MSLA.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MSLA. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Library
Agency (MSLA) for the period beginning November 8, 2021 and ending October
31, 2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSLA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included operating and capital grant programs, corporate purchasing card, and
4

--- Page 7 ---
library programs (Deaf Culture Digital Library, Young Reader's Program,
Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled, digital equity, and
certification for Library Associates). We also determined the status of the finding
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MSLA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MSLA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 8, 2021 to October 31, 2025, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSLA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
5

--- Page 8 ---
MSLA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSLA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Stacey D. Streett
Senior Auditor
Malkah B. Safren
Staff Auditor