Title: Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Racing
Date: 2026-04-10
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=69d972996d7d69bb106fcd6f
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:08:54.199500
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Racing
April 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 10, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) - Division of Racing (DOR) for the period beginning September 1,
2021 and ending January 15, 2026. DOR is responsible for implementing the
policies of the Maryland Racing Commission, which regulates the conduct of
horseracing and pari-mutuel wagering in the State. DOR is also responsible for
the distribution of certain video lottery terminal funds in accordance with certain
provisions of State law.
Our audit disclosed that since 2018, DOR had not performed background checks
on licensees, as required by State regulations. DOR issues licenses for all
individuals working at Maryland racetracks and is required to perform State and
national background checks for all licensees. Additionally, DOR did not
document its reviews of racing misconduct databases from other jurisdictions for
suspension of Maryland licenses.
MDL’s response to this audit, on behalf of DOR, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and
related recommendations and will notify DOR of any needed clarification to
ensure the responses sufficiently address the related findings.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DOR.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) - Division of Racing (DOR) is
responsible for implementing the policies of the Maryland Racing Commission
(Commission), which operates under the provisions of Title 11 of the Business
Regulation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The Commission, which
consists of nine members who are appointed by the Governor, is responsible for
regulating the conduct of horseracing and pari-mutuel wagering in the State.
DOR is also responsible for the allocation of certain video lottery terminal funds.
Specifically, DOR distributes these funds, which are originally collected by the
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency, for the purposes established in the
State Government Article, Title 9 of the Annotated Code of Maryland (purse
dedication, racetrack facility renewal, and local impact grants).
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2025, DOR expenditures
totaled approximately $202 million (see Figure 1) which included $195.7 million
in distributions funded by video lottery terminal revenues for grants and capital
projects. During the period of June 30, 2022 through June 30, 2025, DOR had
vacancy rates that ranged from 0 to 18.2 percent. As of June 30, 2025,
approximately 18.2 percent of the total 22 positions were vacant. These vacancies
were in positions that were unrelated to the finding in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
MDL – DOR
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 18
Vacant 4
Total 22
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 2,288,090
Technical and Special Fees 907,757
Operating Expenses 198,875,648
Total $202,071,495
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 3,347,317
Special Fund 198,724,178
Total $202,071,495
Source: State financial and personnel records
Findings and Recommendations
Licensing
Finding 1
The Division of Racing (DOR) did not perform required verifications of
individuals licensed to work at Maryland racetracks resulting in the failure
to identify and take corrective action for licensees with criminal backgrounds
and past disciplinary action.
Analysis
The Division of Racing (DOR) did not perform required verifications of
individuals licensed to work at Maryland racetracks1 resulting in the failure to
1 Laurel Park, Pimlico Race Course, Rosecroft Raceway, Timonium Race Course, and Ocean
Downs.
4

--- Page 7 ---
identify and take corrective action for licensees with criminal backgrounds and
past disciplinary action. DOR issues annual licenses for all individuals working
at Maryland racetracks including jockeys, concessionaires, and trainers. State
law requires the Maryland Racing Commission (Commission) to conduct criminal
background checks and permits the Commission to deny a license to an applicant
for any reason it deems sufficient. In addition, State regulations provide that
DOR is to suspend or revoke a license if the licensee was suspended or revoked in
another jurisdiction.
According to DOR records, during fiscal year 2025 DOR issued 5,746 licenses.
We reviewed procedures and controls over the license process, and tested 25
licenses issued between fiscal years 2023 and 20262 and noted the following:
 DOR did not perform required background checks of individuals licensed to
work at Maryland racetracks in accordance with state law. We were advised
by DOR management that it discontinued background checks in 2018 because
its fingerprinting machine broke. In this regard, our test of the 25 licenses
disclosed that one 2024 licensee was convicted of battery and malicious
destruction of property in 1993 and another 2026 licensee was convicted of
possession with intent to distribute an illegal substance in 1986 according to
publicly available records. DOR was not aware of the convictions because
they had not performed the required background check.
 DOR did not identify and take enforcement action for licensees with licenses
that were suspended or revoked in other jurisdictions. We were advised that
DOR reviewed national databases (including the Association of Racing
Commissioner’s International, the federal Horseracing Integrity and Safety
Authority, and Horseracing Integrity and Welfare Unit) which included
licensees whose licenses were suspended or revoked in other jurisdictions.
However, DOR did not document its review or any action taken based on the
information in the databases, as required by State regulations.
In this regard, 4 of the aforementioned 25 licensees were suspended in another
jurisdiction while maintaining an active license in Maryland. DOR could not
document that it identified and suspended these licenses. For example, one of
these individuals was licensed in Maryland in 2025 and was suspended 3
different times during the year in other jurisdictions; however, DOR could not
2 We selected licenses which required payment of a fee, such as for thoroughbred and harness
racing. For each licensee tested, we reviewed Maryland conviction records available online. We
did not have access to nationwide conviction records, which are utilized for the required criminal
background checks.
5

--- Page 8 ---
document that it identified this activity and/or suspended the individual’s
license during these periods.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DOR
a. conduct required criminal background checks for all licensees and take
appropriate action, including for those noted above; and
b. identify through national databases licensees that were suspended or
revoked in other jurisdictions, document that identification, and take
appropriate enforcement action including for those noted above.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) - Division of Racing (DOR) for the period beginning September 1,
2021 and ending January 15, 2026. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DOR’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, racing funds, distribution of video
lottery terminal funds, licensing, and certain licensee (racetrack) requirements
regarding the reporting and distribution of peri-mutuel wagering revenue.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DOR by MDL’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, human
resources, purchasing, data processing, maintenance of accounting records, and
related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the MDL -
Office of the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
6

--- Page 9 ---
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of September 1, 2021 to January 15, 2026, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DOR’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine reliability. We
determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the MDL licensing system, for the purpose of testing
license applications and the related approval process. We performed various tests
of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
DOR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
7

--- Page 10 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DOR, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DOR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DOR that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from MDL, on behalf of DOR, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDL regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Racing
Agency Response Form
Licensing
Finding 1
The Division of Racing (DOR) did not perform required verifications of
individuals licensed to work at Maryland racetracks, resulting in the failure
to identify and take corrective action for licensees with criminal backgrounds
and past disciplinary action.
We recommend that DOR
a. conduct required criminal background checks for all licensees and take
appropriate action, including for those noted above; and
b. identify through national databases licensees that were suspended or
revoked in other jurisdictions, document that identification, and take
appropriate enforcement action, including for those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion 03/14/26
Date:3-14-2026
Please provide details of
corrective action or DOR agrees that it must resume regular background checks of all
explain disagreement.
prospective licensees as required by law. DOR has been actively
working to address this issue since January 2025, when the current
executive director of the Maryland Racing Commission began his
tenure.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Racing
Agency Response Form
A new machine has been procured, staff received training on how to
use the machine in February, and fingerprinting resumed on March
14, 2026
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
3-3-26
Please provide details of
corrective action or DOR agrees with the finding and has started taking corrective
explain disagreement.
actions. DOR has started documenting all fines and
suspensions for licensees for their lifetimes, rather than
deleting the notes once the fine is paid or the suspension is
over. From now on, DOR will keep all notes with licensees. DOR
will investigate amending COMAR rules regarding data
retention for out-of-state suspensions and fines. This process
began on March 3, 2026
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Jordan Duke, CFE
Senior Auditor
Jacob T. Esterling
Samantha J. Rhea
Staff Auditors