Title: Maryland Department of Planning
Date: 2026-04-10
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=69dfb868812db14c01779808
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:09:02.777857
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Planning
April 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity information from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 10, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Planning (MDP) for the period beginning May 1, 2021 and ending September 15,
2025. MDP provides information and services that improve the ability of State
and local governments, community development organizations, and
environmental organizations to support desirable growth in Maryland.
Our audit disclosed that MDP did not ensure that Historic Revitalization Tax
Credits (HRTC) were properly certified and recipients maintained compliance
with HRTC requirements. For example, we noted two projects with awarded tax
credits totaling $3.3 million that were not certified by a certified public
accounting firm, as required by State regulations. State law established HRTC
within MDP, under which a commercial entity or homeowner may claim a credit
against a percentage of the expenditures incurred for a certified historic structure
revitalization project. Noncompliance with the terms of the tax credits could
result in recapture of the credit from the recipient.
MDP’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our finding and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDP.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) provides information and services
that improve the ability of State and local governments, as well as community
development and environmental organizations, to support growth that fosters
vibrant, livable communities; preserves and protects the environment; and makes
efficient use of State resources. MDP provides services such as planning and
urban design, computer application development, and technical studies.
According to the State’s records, MDP’s expenditures totaled approximately
$56.1 million during fiscal year 2025 (see Figure 1).
Figure 1
MDP Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 130
Vacant 12
Total 142
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages & Fringe Benefits $18,195,320
Technical and Special Fees 1,023,727
Operating Expenses 36,898,267
Total $56,117,314
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $42,346,593
Special Fund 8,104,349
Federal Fund 4,617,329
Reimbursable Fund 1,049,043
Total $56,117,314
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Historic Revitalization Tax Credit
The Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) administers the Historic
Revitalization Tax Credit (HRTC) program. State law provides that a commercial
entity or homeowner may claim an HRTC equal to 20 to 27.5 percent of qualified
expenditures incurred for a certified historic structure revitalization project. The
commercial entity or homeowner must apply for the HRTC prior to starting the
project and MDP must approve the work and estimated expenditures.
Upon completion of the project, applicants must submit evidence of the project to
MDP to obtain HRTC certification. State regulations require any commercial
applicant with $100,000 or more in expenditures for a historic project to provide
financial statements certified by a certified public accountant (CPA)
demonstrating the expended amounts were for qualified expenditures in
accordance with the application. State law further provides that any disqualifying
changes to the property (changes that would make the property ineligible for
HRTC) within five years of the project completion could result in recapture of the
credit. In addition, commercial
Figure 2
HRTCs with projected
HRTCs During the Audit Period
expenditures for the historic
(in millions)
project greater than $500,000 are
subject to recapture if the property
is sold within five years of project Commercial
>$500,000 Homeowner
completion.
$20.2 $5.8
According to MDP’s records,
during the audit period, MDP Commercial
<=$500,000
certified approximately $28.8 Source: MDP HRTC records
$2.8
million in HRTCs,1 the majority of
which were for commercial
applicants with historic project costs greater than $500,000 (see Figure 2). We
tested 32 HRTCs during our audit period totaling $20.5 million including all 24
commercial HRTC’s with expenditures greater than $500,000, 3 commercial
HRTCs with expenditures less than $500,000, and 5 homeowner HRTCs.2
1 This dollar amount represents a total of 598 HRTCs certified by MDP, including 24 commercial
projects with costs greater than $500,000, 83 homeowner projects, and 491 commercial projects
with costs less than or equal to $500,000.
2 Test items were generally selected based on an evaluation of materiality and risk; however, as
noted, all HRTCs with expenditures greater than $500,000 were included.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 1
MDP did not ensure expenditures used to calculate commercial HRTCs were
certified, as required, and did not monitor commercial and homeowner
HRTC recipients to ensure they maintained compliance with the terms of the
credit.
Analysis
MDP did not ensure expenditures used to calculate commercial HRTCs were
certified, as required, and did not monitor commercial and homeowners HRTC
recipients to ensure they maintained compliance with the terms of the credit.
• MDP did not ensure commercial applicants with historic project costs over
$500,000 obtained the required CPA certifications of expenditures. Our
test of 24 of these HRTCs disclosed that 2 recipients awarded $3.3 million
in credits, did not have the required CPA certifications. Specifically, the
financial statements submitted by 1 applicant had a disclaimed opinion3 on
the reported $15 million in expenditures used to support a $3 million
credit and the statement for another applicant was certified by an
accounting firm in another country with no evidence they were a CPA.
• MDP did not monitor commercial and homeowner HRTC recipients to
ensure they maintained compliance with the terms of the credit.
Specifically, MDP did not ensure the 1,173 HRTC projects completed,
that were subject to recapture during our audit period, did not make any
changes that would make the property ineligible for the HRTC or ensure
that commercial HRTC properties with project expenditures greater than
$500,000 were not sold. Our test of the 24 commercial HRTCs did not
identify any properties sold within our audit period4 but we could not
readily determine if any HRTCs made changes to the properties due to the
lack of monitoring efforts.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDP
a. ensure that commercial projects are appropriately certified, as required;
b. obtain the required certifications for the commercial properties noted
above; and
3 In general, a disclaimed opinion is issued when the CPA does not audit or review the supporting
documentation necessary to express an opinion.
4 HRTCs with project expenditures over $500,000 are subject to recapture if the property is sold
within 5 years of project completion.
5

--- Page 8 ---
c. monitor completed revitalization projects, including those noted above, to
ensure they maintain their eligibility for the HRTC and recapture any
credits for non-compliant recipients.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Planning (MDP) for the period beginning May 1, 2021 and ending September 15,
2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, cash receipts,
payroll, certain tax credit programs, intergovernmental planning services, loans,
selected grants and information systems security and control.5
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDP’s compliance with those laws and regulations by MDP
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including MDP.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 1, 2021 to September 15, 2025, but may include transactions
before or after this period, as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
5 The details of our information systems security and control review have been redacted from this
publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
6

--- Page 9 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDP’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from MDP’s grants management system for the purpose of
testing the propriety of grant disbursements. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MDP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDP, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also considered a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the MDP that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity information before a
report is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity information – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain information in this report
falls under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report
all specifics as to the nature of this cybersecurity information has been redacted.
We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and government auditing
standards, support the redaction of this information from the public audit report.
The specifics of the cybersecurity information have been communicated to MDP
and those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations in an unredacted
audit report.
MDP’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
8

--- Page 11 ---
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDP regarding the results of our
review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX
April 7, 2026
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Electronic Transmittal to: response@ola.maryland.gov.
Dear Mr. Tanen,
In response to the draft audit report provided by your office on March 26, 2026,
and in accordance with Committee’s Policy on Agency Responses to Reports Issued by the
Office of Legislative Audits, the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) is submitting the
attached Agency Response Form. This document addresses the one finding identified by
the audit team for the time period of May 1, 2021 through September 15, 2025.
As you will note, my office is in agreement with the finding and has offered related
corrective actions to address the matter. These are detailed within the accompanying
Agency Response Form (ARF). We believe these actions will fully address the areas of
concern and will become part of the way we handle such matters moving forward.
In closing, I would like to commend the audit team who worked closely with my staff over
the last five months. We found them to be extremely professional and courteous, and
valued the immense amount of time they put into addressing MDP’s financial and
operational policies and procedures. I am unsure how often people thank auditors, but in
this case, I believe it is merited.
Sincerely,
Rebecca L. Flora
Secretary

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland Department of Planning
Agency Response Form
Historic Revitalization Tax Credit
Finding 1
MDP did not ensure expenditures used to calculate commercial HRTCs were
certified, as required, and did not monitor commercial and homeowner
HRTC recipients to ensure they maintained compliance with the terms of the
credit.
We recommend that MDP
a. ensure that commercial projects are appropriately certified, as required;
b. obtain the required certifications for the commercial properties noted
above; and
c. monitor completed revitalization projects, including those noted above, to
ensure they maintain their eligibility for the HRTC and recapture any
credits for non-compliant recipients.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/2026
Please provide details of MDP will undertake three corrective actions to address this finding:
corrective action or
1. MDP will amend the tax credit program instructions to clarify the
explain disagreement.
requirements for certified public accountants eligible to prepare financial
statements for review by MHT, specifying that such accountants must
demonstrate licensure in Maryland or, if licensed in another state,
provide evidence of a Maryland firm permit or otherwise meet
requirements established by the Maryland Board of Public Accountancy.
2. MDP will create a new form to be included with the financial
documentation package. The form will include an attestation box for the
CPA’s signature and require backup documentation demonstrating that
the firm is licensed in Maryland or, if licensed in another state, provide
evidence of a Maryland firm permit or otherwise meet requirements
established by the Maryland Board of Public Accountancy.
3.MDP will create a checklist for the tax credit reviewer to use when
reviewing the Part 3 application to: a.) confirm that CPAs have
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 14 ---
Maryland Department of Planning
Agency Response Form
demonstrated licensure in Maryland or, if licensed in another state, have
submitted evidence of a Maryland firm permit or other documentation
required by the Maryland Board of Public Accountancy and, b.) to
confirm that the CPA has certified the project financial statement.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/2026
Please provide details of MHT will request receipt of properly certified financial documentation
corrective action or from the two tax credit recipients identified as deficient by the auditors.
explain disagreement. If the applicants are unable to provide the required documentation to
MHT within 6 months, then MHT will refer the cases to the Comptroller
of Maryland Compliance Division.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/2026
Please provide details of MDP will undertake three corrective actions in response to this finding.
corrective action or
1.MDP will create a disposition table going forward for each commercial
explain disagreement.
project that receives a tax credit award. Ownership for each project will
be identified in the table when a Part 3 application is approved.
Ownership changes will be monitored using data provided by SDAT. In
those cases where an ownership change has taken place within the 5-year
recapture period, projects will be referred to the Comptroller
Compliance Division.
2 MHT will develop written procedures for ensuring ongoing
compliance of completed tax credit projects for five years following
completion. This will likely take the form of an external inspection of a
subset of properties during the five-year recapture period.
3. MHT will update HRTC guidelines to ensure that applicants are given
clear instruction on how they can avoid potential recapture of tax credits
during the five-year recapture period due to disqualifying work or sale or
transfer of commercial properties.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 15 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Dorian A. Fournier, CIA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Kristopher A. Miller
Amy C. Roberts
Staff Auditors