Title: Maryland Department of the Environment
Date: 2026-04-20
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=69ea2dc8a71db1b3005e9660
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:08:27.160106
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of the Environment
April 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 20, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of the
Environment (MDE) for the period beginning May 1, 2021 and ending February
28, 2025. MDE is responsible for protecting and restoring the quality of the
State’s land, air, and water resources, and safeguarding the public from health
risks associated with pollution.
Our audit disclosed that MDE did not have a documented process to
independently verify the propriety of MDE lead-free certificates unilaterally
issued by inspectors hired by property owners. MDE also did not notify
numerous property owners and tenants for several months after it suspended the
inspector that had issued their lead-free or limited lead-free certificates. MDE
also did not ensure these properties were re-inspected and did not ensure children
residing in the properties obtained recommended lead blood-level testing.
Furthermore, MDE did not ensure that all registered rental units had a current lead
inspection certificate as required and did not investigate rental units without a
current inspection, a condition noted but not corrected from our prior report.
Our audit also disclosed that MDE did not review and approve wastewater
discharge permits timely and did not always conduct timely inspections of the
facilities. For example, as of April 2025, inspections for 224 facilities were
between 7 months to more than 5 years overdue for their inspections (including
facilities with administratively continued permits). In addition, our audit
disclosed that MDE did not inspect certain radiation machines timely.
In addition, we received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline related to
procurement and personnel practices by certain MDE senior management
employees. Based on our review, we were able to substantiate certain concerns

--- Page 4 ---
raised in the allegations. We also identified a potential violation of State ethics
law related to secondary employment with a State university doing business with
MDE. Our audit disclosed that MDE also did not always publish contract awards
on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required. Furthermore, our
audit noted that accounts receivable records were not complete and accurate or
timely pursued for collections.
Finally, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
MDE’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of MDE’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the
response and, while MDE generally agrees with the recommendations in this
report, we identified certain instances in which statements in the response
disagree or appear to be inconsistent with a report finding and recommendation.
In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within
MDE’s response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
MDE.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
MDE.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Financial Statement Audits and Single Audits– Maryland Water Quality 7
Financing Administration
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) Headquarters Building 8
Lease Renewal
Referrals to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 11
Lead Certificates and Inspections
Finding 1 – MDE did not have a documented process to independently 12
verify the propriety of MDE lead-free certificates unilaterally issued
by inspectors hired by property owners, certain of which could not be
supported.
Finding 2 – MDE did not timely notify property owners and tenants 13
When it suspended an inspector that had improperly issued lead-free
and limited lead-free certificates. In addition, MDE did not take
sufficient action to ensure these properties were re-inspected and that
children residing in the properties obtained lead blood-level testing.
* Finding 3 – MDE did not ensure that all registered rental units had a 14
currrent lead inspection certificate, as required, and did not investigate
registered rental units without a current inspection recorded on its
automated system.
Wastewater Discharge Permits
Finding 4 – MDE did not review and approve wastewater discharge 15
permits timely and did not always conduct timely inspections of
facilities, as required.
Radiation Machine Inspections
Finding 5 – MDE did not inspect 1,311 radiation machines timely, as 16
required.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Purchasing and Personnel Transactions
Finding 6 – MDE could not support the propriety of certain activity 17
processed by or on behalf of a senior management employee.
Finding 7 – A management employee’s secondary employment with a 18
State university doing business with MDE potentially violated State
ethics law.
Finding 8 – MDE did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland 19
Marketplace Advantage as required by State procurement
regulations.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 20
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 20
Accounts Receivable
Finding 11 – MDE did not ensure its accounts receivable records were 20
complete and accurate, and timely pursue collections, as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) is responsible for
protecting and restoring the quality of the State's land, air, and water resources,
and safeguarding the public from health risks associated with pollution. MDE's
duties and responsibilities include enforcing applicable laws and regulations,
conducting long-term planning and research, and assisting industries and
communities in their efforts to handle pollution, waste disposal, and emergency
spills of waste or oil. According to the 2026 State operating budget, MDE
consists of the following six units:
 Office of the Secretary – Provides direction and establishes State
environmental policies to be implemented by the operating units.
 Business Administration – Provides fiscal services to MDE, including
general accounting and reporting, payroll and salary cost allocation, grant and
loan financial reporting, personnel and staff development, procurement,
facilities management, and health and safety.
 Water and Science Administration – Sets water quality standards and
identifies surface water impairments and high-quality waters, and supports the
Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration.1 Also, the Administration
ensures that the drinking water systems in Maryland provide safe and
adequate supplies of potable water.
 Land and Materials Administration – Ensures that all hazardous wastes and
non-hazardous solid wastes are managed to protect public health and the
environment. The Administration issues permits and conducts inspections
pertaining to design, construction, and operation of various facilities (such as
solid waste management systems and facilities). The Administration also
manages the State’s lead poisoning prevention and lead paint abatement
services accreditation programs, investigates lead poisoning cases, maintains
lead poisoning registries, tracks the incidence of lead poisoning, conducts
paint surveys of residential buildings, and educates healthcare providers and
the public.
 Air and Radiation Administration – Ensures that air quality and radiation
levels in Maryland sustain public health, safety, and the environment. It
operates an air-monitoring network to obtain up-to-the-minute data on air
quality, develops plans to attain and maintain health-based national ambient
air quality standards, and promulgates regulations to implement these plans.
1 The Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration administers the Water Quality and
Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Emergency and Support Services – Responsible for coordinating public
information and outreach, community assistance, public participation, media
relations, promoting pollution prevention; responding to environmental
emergencies; and providing legal advice and investigating and prosecuting
violations of Maryland’s environmental statutes and regulations.
According to the State's records, during fiscal year 2025, MDE's expenditures
totaled approximately $606 million (see Figure 1), the majority of which were for
capital projects related to its Water Quality and Drinking Water Revolving Loan
Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund. The capital projects include upgrades and
expansions to wastewater treatment plants and pump stations, the creation of
storm water management facilities, grants for enhanced nutrient removal upgrades
to existing wastewater facilities, grants for sewer infrastructure rehabilitation, and
grants for septic system upgrades.
Figure 1
MDE Expenditures Fiscal Year 2025
(in millions)
Water and
Science
$60.1
Capital 10% Land and
Expenditures $36.6 Materials
6%
$383.9
$26.8
63%
Air and
5%
Radiation
$98.6
16%
Administrative
Offices*
Source:State records
*includes Office of the Secretary, Business Administation, and Emergency
and Support Services
6

--- Page 9 ---
As noted in Figure 2, expenditures were funded primarily by special and federal
funds. During the period June 30, 2021 through June 30, 2025, MDE had
vacancy rates that ranged from 10.2 percent to 21.2 percent. These vacancies may
have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
Figure 2
MDE Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 846
Vacant 96
Total 942
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 118,462,567
Technical and Special Fees 3,827,376
Operating Expenses 483,698,186
Total $ 605,988,129
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 49,451,584
Special Fund 337,040,974
Federal Fund 212,505,118
Reimbursable Fund 6,990,453
Total $ 605,988,129
Source: State financial and personnel records
Financial Statement Audits and Single Audits – Maryland Water
Quality Financing Administration
MDE engaged an independent accounting firm to audit the Maryland Water
Quality Financing Administration's Water Quality and Drinking Water Revolving
Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund for the fiscal years ended June 30,
2022, 2023, and 2024. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the
Administration's financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Administration and its changes in financial position and
7

--- Page 10 ---
its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with the accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The accounting firm also conducted the Single Audit of the Maryland Water
Quality Financing Administration federal grant programs. The Single Audit is
intended to provide assurance to the federal government that adequate internal
controls are in place, and that the audited entity is generally in compliance with
certain program requirements. In the related reports for the fiscal years ended
June 30, 2022, 2023, and 2024, the firm stated that the Administration complied,
in all material respects, with the types of compliance requirements that could have
a direct and material effect on each of its major federal programs. According to
the financial statements, as of June 30, 2024, the Maryland Water Quality
Financing Administration's net position totaled approximately $2.2 billion.
MDE Headquarters Building Lease Renewal
Our July 28, 2025 audit report on the Department of General Services – Office of
the Secretary and Other Units (DGS) included a finding related to the renewal of
MDE’s headquarters building lease in January 2024 at a cost of $167.1 million.
The audit report identified the following:
 DGS could not support the basis for the significant increase in the lease rate
from the prior lease from $20.84 to $22.54 per square foot (8.2 percent).
 DGS could not adequately justify the basis for the lease term and annual
escalation percentage which significantly exceeded other leases awarded by
DGS. Specifically, the lease provided for a 20-year term and an annual rent
escalation rate of 3.45 percent increasing the annual rent from $5.9 million to
$11.3 million in the final year.
 DGS could not support the decision to procure the renovations through the
lease instead of competitively procuring the services.
 DGS could not adequately justify the decision to waive the termination for
convenience clause which DGS advised was waived to help the landlord
secure financing for the $10 million in improvements.
 DGS did not disclose to the Board of Public Works (BPW) that $7.9 million
of the $10 million in building renovations related to cubicle enhancements and
not energy enhancements.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Our current audit of MDE did not include a review of the building lease since it
was procured by DGS.
Referrals to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline regarding certain
rental units not being inspected for lead by MDE and registered as required. We
also received several allegations regarding questionable procurement and
personnel practices by certain MDE senior management employees.
Based on our review, we were able to substantiate certain of the concerns raised
in the allegations and identified deficiencies with MDE’s procedures and controls
for transactions as further described in Findings 3 and 6. In addition, during our
review we identified a possible violation of State ethics law as further described
in Finding 7. Our review did not identify any matters that warranted a referral to
the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 3, 2022. See Figure 3 for the results of
our review.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE)
did not always use available system reports to ensure Repeated
Finding 1
that all registered rental units had a current lead (Current Finding 3)
inspection certificate as required.
MDE did not verify the propriety of charges related to
technology enterprise services received from the
Finding 2 Not Repeated
Department of Information Technology during fiscal
years 2020 and 2021 valued at $5.1 million.
Finding 3 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 4 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 5 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
2 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
have been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Lead Certificates and Inspections
Background
State law requires rental housing units built before 1978 to be inspected by an
MDE-accredited inspector to ensure that there are safe levels of lead in tenant-
occupied units. The law further provides that these inspectors may issue an
appropriate MDE certificate to the property owner after the inspection verifies the
property meets the related regulations. These inspectors are independent third-
party contractors hired by the property owner. MDE has two types of lead-free
certificates based on these inspections:
1. Lead-free certificates are issued if an inspector confirms through an
onsite inspection and testing that there is no amount (or miminal amounts)
of lead present on the interior and exterior of the property. This type of
certificate does not require the property to be re-inspected.
2. Limited lead-free certificates are issued when an inspector certifies
through an onsite inspection and testing that there is no amount (or
miminal amounts) of lead present on the interior of the property. This
type of certificate requires the property to be re-inspected every two years.
MDE uses its Online Lead Rental Registration system (OLRR) to record all
registration and renewal information, such as property and payment information,
for each owner. This information is recorded by property owners through online
registrations and by MDE through paper registrations. According to MDE’s
records, as of September 2, 2025, there were 101,199 active rental units
constructed before 1978 that were recorded in OLRR as registered properties.
MDE also maintains a separate inspection certification database. The inspection
certification database is updated based on documentation submitted by the
inspectors after the completion of the related property inspections.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
MDE did not have a documented process to independently verify the
propriety of MDE lead-free certificates unilaterally issued by inspectors
hired by property owners, certain of which could not be supported.
Analysis
MDE did not have a documented process to independently verify the propriety of
MDE lead-free certificates unilaterally issued by inspectors, certain of which
could not be supported. According to MDE’s records, these inspectors
unilaterally issued 13,516 lead-free certificates to property owners during the
period from April 2021 through July 2025. Our review disclosed MDE did not
have a documented process to independently verify the lead-free inspections, even
on a test basis. In this regard, MDE did not even require the inspectors to submit
detailed documentation to support the inspection results. Rather, MDE only
required the inspector to submit a summary of the testing results and to retain the
detailed documentation for review upon request.
The lack of documented independent verifications and support for the inspection
results is crtical because the inspectors are selected and paid by the property
owners. In this regard, as further discussed in the next finding, an inspector was
convicted of falsifying numerous inspection results over several years which may
have been detected earlier had the aforementioned verifications been in place. In
addition, MDE advised us that it was currently investigating other inspectors for
improperly certifying properties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDE
a. establish procedures to independently verify current and future lead-free
inspections, at least on a test basis;
b. ensure documentation is obtained and reviewed to support the propriety
of inspections that result in the issuance of a lead-free certificate; and
c. invalidate any lead-free certification that cannot be supported and take
necessary disciplinary action.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 2
MDE did not timely notify property owners and tenants when it suspended
an inspector that had improperly issued lead-free and limited lead-free
certificates. In addition, MDE did not take sufficient action to ensure these
properties were re-inspected and that children residing in the properties
obtained lead blood-level testing.
Analysis
MDE did not timely notify property owners and tenants when it suspended an
inspector that had improperly issued lead-free and limited lead-free certificates.
In addition, MDE did not take sufficient action to ensure the properties were
reinspected and that children in the properties obtained lead blood-level testing.
In March 20243 MDE became aware that an inspector that issued 1,542 lead-free
certificates between January 2017 and April 2024 may not have conducted proper
inspections. MDE conducted a review of the inspections and identified additional
questionable activity that it referred to the
Office of the Attorney General’s Environmental
and Natural Resources Crimes Unit in April
2024.4 On October 3, 2025, the inspector plead
guilty of falsifying lead inspection certitificates
and operating a radiation machine without
obtaining a license from MDE.
As noted in the attached timeline, although
MDE advised that it suspended the inspector’s
license in April 2024, virtually all the property
owners and tenants certified by this inspector
were not notified until February 2025 (10
months after the suspension). MDE also did
not ensure that the related properties obtained a
new inspection after it identified additional
questionable inspections and children with high
lead levels in the inspected properties.
Specifically, in response to these concerns
MDE sent a notification to the property owners
in July 2025 that required the properties to be
3 MDE became aware that the inspector was probably issuing improper lead-free certificates after
it witnessed the inspector not properly using inspection equipment resulting in faulty test results.
MDE’s investigation eventually resulted in criminal prosecution by the Office of the Attorney
General.
4 As noted in the timeline, MDE also referred the matter to the Attorney General for a civil
enforcement action against the inspector in August 2024.
13

--- Page 16 ---
re-inspected by an MDE-accredited lead inspector within 30 days. Our review of
MDE records as of December 31, 2025 disclosed that only 299 properties had
been issued a new inspection certificate.
MDE also did not ensure that children residing in the units were tested for lead.
MDE’s July 2025 notification to the tenants recommended children to get a lead
blood-level test to determine if they had elevated lead levels in their blood.
However, MDE did not attempt to follow up with the tenants to ensure they
received the letter, or to help ensure children residing in these properties obtained
the recommended lead blood-level test. This is significant, because as noted in
the MDE timeline, children residing in these properties tested positive for high
lead levels.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDE
a. ensure all properties noted above are immediately re-inspected, as
required;
b. in the future, timely notify all property owners and tenants as soon as it
becomes aware of improperly issued certificates; and
c. follow-up with the tenants at properties with improperly issued
certificates (including those noted above) to determine if any children had
the recommended lead blood-level test.
Finding 3
MDE did not ensure that all registered rental units had a current lead
inspection certificate, as required, and did not investigate registered rental
units without a current inspection recorded on its automated system.
Analysis
MDE did not ensure that all registered rental units built before 1978 had a current
lead inspection certificate, as required. We received a referral to our fraud, waste,
and abuse hotline alleging that certain rental units had not been inspected, as
required. Based on our review, we were able to substantiate the allegation but did
not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General’s Criminal Division.
MDE performs a daily match of its OLRR system of registered rental properties
to its database of inspection certificates to identify properties needing an
inspection. We obtained the match results as of September 2, 2025 which noted
that 14,506 of the 101,199 active rental units subject to lead inspections did not
match to an inspection on the inspection database. MDE could not document that
14

--- Page 17 ---
it investigated any of the match results. In this regard, our arbitrary test of 20 of
these rental units disclosed that MDE had no record of a lead inspection for 8
units, and 1 unit with a failed inspection. The remaining 11 units had a current
inspection but did not match because certain of the data used in the match was not
consistently recorded in both systems.
A similar condition regarding the lack of lead inspection certificates for certain
rental properties was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response
to that report, MDE indicated that by October 2022 it would make any necessary
adjustments to system functionality and conduct manual compliance checks to
ensure rental properties are inspected as required. However, MDE did not
implement the corrective action as indicated in its response.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDE review the reports from the automated match of
registered rental units and related lead inspection certificates and take
appropriate corrective action to ensure inspections are completed as
required (repeat), including those noted above.
Wastewater Discharge Permits
Finding 4
MDE did not review and approve wastewater discharge permits timely and
did not always conduct timely inspections of facilities, as required.
Analysis
MDE did not review and approve wastewater discharge permits timely and did
not always conduct inspections of facilities, as required. In accordance with
federal and State laws, MDE is required to issue wastewater discharge permits to
facilities which specify allowable limits for releasing wastewater that may include
contaminants into ground or surface water. MDE is also required to perform
inspections at least every two years for major facilities (such as, municipal
wastewater treatment plants) or every five years for minor facilities (such as, fish
farms and small wastewater treatment plants).5 According to MDE records, as of
April 1, 2025, there were 578 active permitted wastewater discharge facilities
including 74 major facilities and 504 minor facilities.
5 MDE wastewater discharge permitted facilities are categized into two types based on the amount
of wastewater discharged per day, a major facility, discharging at least one million gallons per
day and a minor facility, discharging less than one million gallons per day.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 MDE did not review and approve wastewater discharge permits timely. Our
analysis of MDE’s permit records as of April 2025, disclosed that MDE had a
backlog of 120 permit applications for 24 major facilities and 96 minor
facilities. As allowed by State law, MDE “administratively continued” the
current permit for these facilities which allow them to continue services until a
new permit is issued. According to MDE’s records, 69 of the 120 permit
applications (16 major facilities and 53 minor facilities) have been
administratively continued for more than a year, including 19 facilities
administratively continued for between 3 and 9 years.
Chapter 22, Laws of Maryland 2022, effective July 1, 2022, required MDE to
clear the backlog of administratively continued permits by December 2026
and submit a staffing plan to clear the backlog. MDE submitted a plan in
October 2022, stating it would require 71 additional positions to comply with
the new law and clear the backlog. MDE was authorized for 32 positions for
fiscal year 2024 and as of November 2025, had only filled 24 of the new
positions.
 MDE did not always conduct inspections of facilities timely as required by
State law. As of April 2025, inspections for 224 facilities (201 minor and 23
major) were between 7 months to more than 5 years overdue for their
inspections (including facilities with administratively continued permits).
Specifically, 78 of the 201 minor facilities were 5 years overdue for their
inspection and 4 of the 23 major facilities were between 6 to 7 years overdue.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDE
a. ensure wastewater discharge permits are issued timely,
b. ensure the backlog of administratively continued permits noted above are
addressed in accordance with State law, and
c. inspect wastewater discharge facilities and administratively continued
permits timely, as required.
Radiation Machine Inspections
Finding 5
MDE did not inspect 1,311 radiation machines timely, as required.
Analysis
MDE did not inspect radiation machines (such as dental, veterinarian, and
mammogram x-ray machines and machines located in hospitals and medical
16

--- Page 19 ---
offices) timely, as required. MDE employees and third-party inspectors perform
visual inspections of the machines for damage, verify all required safety features
(such as emergency shutoff) are properly functioning, and ensure the machines
are not emitting radiation above the maximum allowed levels. For example,
MDE is required to conduct inspections for dental x-ray machines every 3 to 4
years depending on the manufacturer of the machine. According to MDE’s
records as of March 2025, there were 15,803 machines at 5,330 locations
requiring an inspection at varying intervals.
Our analysis of MDE’s records as of March 2025 disclosed that 1,311 machines
were overdue for inspection ranging from 7 months to 4 years. For example,
1,151 machines at dental locations were 7 months to 4 years overdue for an
inspection. The lack of timely inspection could result in unnecessary radiation
exposure for facility employees and patients. MDE management advised us that
these delays were primarily caused by a lack of qualified individuals to perform
the inspections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDE ensure that radiation machines are inspected as
required.
Purchasing and Personnel Transactions
Finding 6
MDE could not support the propriety of certain activity processed by or on
behalf of a senior management employee.
Analysis
MDE could not support the propriety of certain activity processed by or on behalf
of a senior management employee. We received a referral to our fraud, waste and
abuse hotline that included several allegations regarding questionable
procurement and personnel practices by certain MDE senior management
employees.
Our Special Investigation Unit (SIU) conducted a review of certain of the
allegations. Our review did not identify any matters that warranted a referral to
the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division but did identify
deficiencies with MDE’s procedures and controls for transactions as further
described below. In addition, during our review we identified a possible violation
of State ethics law by a management employee addressed in the next finding.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 MDE could not justify and support a retroactive salary increase for a senior
management employee’s assistant in excess of Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) limits. In September 2024 MDE promoted the assistant
with an associated salary increase of $4,978 retroactive to July 2024. In
October 2024 the senior management employee submitted a request to DBM
for an exemption from the 6 percent limit on promotions to retroactively
increase the assistant’s salary by an additional $11,305 (14 percent) effective
July 2024. The request identified additional work performed by the assistant
to justify the increase. DBM approved the request in December 2024.
Our review disclosed that the request may not have been justified because the
work identified in the request was generally included in the standard job
description for the assistant’s new position. In addition, MDE could not
provide documentation to support other work included in the request.
According to the State’s personnel system the assistant subsequently resigned
in January 2026.
 MDE could not provide documentation to support a $25,000 payment in
February 2025 to a California nonprofit organization for which the senior
management employee served on the public policy board. We were advised
that the payment, approved by a subordinate of the senior management
employee, was for MDE to be included in a national marketing campaign to
promote the use of electric vehicles. This explanation was not consistent with
the invoice, which indicated the payment was to become a supporting member
of the organization. MDE also had no documentation of the campaign or any
written analysis of anticipated benefits to MDE prior to the payment.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDE
a. ensure that salary transactions are properly justified and supported, and
b. perform documented analyses to justify future payments to membership
organizations to ensure they are in the best interests of the State.
Finding 7
A management employee’s secondary employment with a State university
doing business with MDE potentially violated State ethics law.
Analysis
A management employee’s secondary employment with a State university doing
business with MDE potentially violated State ethics law. In January 2023, MDE
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with a State university to
18

--- Page 21 ---
obtain services for an MDE project that was overseen by the management
employee. According to State records, payments under this MOU through July
2025 totaled approximately $189,600.
Our review disclosed that the MDE management employee was also employed by
the State university and was a coworker and research partner of the State
university employee responsible for providing services under the MOU. In this
regard, advice issued by the State Ethics Commission to the management
employee in April 2022 stated that the employee was prohibited from
participating in matters with the State university if it involved coworkers from the
employee’s secondary employment.
Senior management personnel at the Commission advised us that the management
employee’s secondary employment and participation in this MOU could
potentially violate certain provisions of State ethics law. Specifically, Section 5-
502 of the General Provisions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
prohibits an employee from having other employment that would impair the
impartiality and independent judgement of the employee.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDE refer the potential violation of State ethics law to
the Commission and take action to comply with any decisions that the
Commission provides on this matter.
Finding 8
MDE did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement regulations.
Analysis
MDE did not always publish contract awards on eMMA6 as required by State
procurement regulations. During the period from October 2021 to June 2024,
MDE awarded 14 contracts that were individually greater than $100,000 totaling
approximately $25.4 million, of which 11 totaling $15.1 million were not
published on eMMA, as required.
State regulations require that contract awards greater than $100,000 be published
on eMMA within 30 days of award. Publishing awards provides transparency
over State procurements including information about winning bidders and the
amount of the related awards.
6 eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) is an internet-based, interactive procurement system
managed by the Department of General Services.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MDE publish contract awards on eMMA as required,
including those noted above.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 9 and 10 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDE’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Accounts Receivable
Finding 11
MDE did not ensure its accounts receivable records were complete and
accurate, and timely pursue collections, as required.
Analysis
MDE did not maintain complete accounts receivable records and timely pursue
collections, as required. Each administration (Water and Science, Land and
Materials, and Air and Radiation) invoices third parties for amounts due for fines,
penalties, loans, permit fees and other activities. According to MDE records, as
of June 30, 2025, there were 3,303 outstanding invoices totaling approximately
$8.2 million, of which 3,232 invoices totaling $8.1 million were over 90 days old.
 MDE did not ensure its accounts receivable records were complete and
accurate by periodically reconciling the account receivable records maintained
by each administration to the State’s accounting records. Consequently, MDE
20

--- Page 23 ---
did not identify and resolve discrepancies. For example, State records
indicated the Air and Radiation Administration’s receivable balance was
$15.1 million as of September 2025 while the corresponding balance in the
Administration’s records totaled $3.7 million. MDE advised that the
Administration’s records were not reconciled to the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) since March 2024 due to staffing
shortages.
 MDE did not pursue collection of outstanding invoices and refer them to CCU
timely. Our test of 11 outstanding invoices as of April 20257 totaling
approximately $3 million disclosed that MDE could not document that it sent
all required dunning notices for 9 tested invoices totaling $1 million. For
example, MDE could not document that it sent any dunning notices for 2
invoices for annual fees and a legal judgment payment totaling $717,600. In
addition, for 7 other invoices totaling $295,000, sent the dunning notices from
29 to 380 days late. Furthermore, 6 invoices totaling $925,000, were not
referred to CCU timely (43 days to 549 days late) and 4 invoices totaling
$104,500 had not been referred as of April 2025 (259 days to 1,036 days after
the invoice issuance date).
The General Accounting Division of the Comptroller of Maryland requires that
accounts should be reconciled periodically to a control account. Furthermore,
State regulations require three written demands for payment at 30-day intervals
and referral of delinquent accounts to CCU for additional collection efforts 15
days after the account is declared delinquent.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MDE
a. reconcile its account receivable records to corresponding amounts in
State records, to identify and correct any errors noted, including those
noted above; and
b. timely send all dunning notices and refer delinquent accounts to CCU as
required, including those noted above.
7 We selected delinquent invoices from FMIS and from MDE’s accounts receivable records based
on materiality and risk.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of the
Environment (MDE) for the period beginning May 1, 2021 and ending February
28, 2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDE’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included accounts receivables, procurements and
disbursements, equipment, payroll, federal funds, corporate purchasing card,
permitting, inspections and violation assessments, licensing, and information
systems security and control. In addition, we reviewed certain activities related to
referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
MDE engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the Maryland
Water Quality Financing Administration’s financial statements. In related audit
reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022, 2023, and 2024, the firm stated
that the Administration’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Administration and its changes in financial
position and its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with the
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of the Maryland Water
Quality Financing Administration federal grant programs. The Single Audit is
intended to provide assurance to the federal government that adequate internal
controls are in place, and the entity is generally in compliance with certain
program requirements. In the related reports for the aforementioned fiscal years,
the firm stated that the Administration complied, in all material respects, with the
types of compliance requirements that could have a direct and material effect on
each of its major federal programs.
22

--- Page 25 ---
We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage of certain aspects of the Maryland Water Quality Financing
Administration’s operations (internal controls and testing for the Water Quality
and Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds programs). Our audit procedures in
these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for
that reliance.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal assistance programs not covered by the
aforementioned Single Audit of the Maryland Water Quality Financing
Administration and an assessment of MDE’s compliance with those laws and
regulations. The State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including MDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 1, 2021 to February 28, 2025, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDE’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data), the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
23

--- Page 26 ---
We also extracted data from MDE’s permit, registration, and enforcement
systems, and from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as permits, inspections and penalties processed, as well
as certain payroll transactions. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDE, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDE that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
24

--- Page 27 ---
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MDE and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from MDE to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDE regarding the results of our review of its
response.
25

--- Page 28 ---
APPENDIX
April 8, 2026
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
On behalf of the Maryland Department of the Environment, I would like to formally acknowledge the
completion of the fiscal compliance audit covering the period of May 1, 2021 through February 28,
2025.
We sincerely appreciate the significant time your team invested in evaluating our operations. We
remain committed to strengthening our internal controls and ensure the continued integrity of our
agency.
Sincerely,
Serena McIlwain
Secretary, Maryland Department of the Environment
1800 Washington Boulevard | Baltimore, MD 21230 | 410-537-3000 | TTY Users Dial 711
mde.maryland.gov

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Background Information
Agency Response
Agency Inaccurate
Responsibilities
Please explain any The Office of Emergency Preparedness and Response is housed within
concerns with factual the Office of the Secretary and Coordinating Offices. It is not within the
accuracy. scope of the Office of Emergency Preparedness and Response nor MDE
to provide legal advice or prosecute violations of Maryland’s
environmental statutes and regulations.
As with most other state government entities, the Office of the Attorney
General represents MDE in legal matters, provides legal advice, and
prosecutes violations on behalf of MDE. MDE investigates, revokes
licences, and levies fines.
The Water Quality Financing Administration is now called the Water
Infrastructure Finance Administration.
Auditor’s Comment: The comments reflect additional information, details or
subsequent events that do not dispute the factual accuracy of the background
information.
Page 1 of 27

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Lead Certificates and Inspections
Finding 1
MDE did not have a documented process to independently verify the
propriety of MDE lead-free certificates unilaterally issued by inspectors
hired by property owners, certain of which could not be supported.
We recommend that MDE
a. establish procedures to independently verify current and future lead-free
inspections, at least on a test basis;
b. ensure documentation is obtained and reviewed to support the propriety
of inspections that result in the issuance of a lead-free certificate; and
c. invalidate any lead-free certification that cannot be supported and take
necessary disciplinary action.
Agency Response
Analysis Inaccurate
Please provide MDE’s Lead Poisoning Prevention Program operates in accordance with
additional comments as the Maryland Environment Article, Title 6, Subtitle 8, and COMAR
deemed necessary. 26.16.01–.05 and exceeds Federal EPA standards. While MDE
appreciates OLA’s recommendations to review policies that could
enhance its ability to verify third-party data, MDE currently operates in
full alignment with existing statutes and regulations.
Maryland law provides licensed inspectors with responsibility to conduct
inspections and issue and retain documentation for lead-free certificates.
MDE’s role is to license, oversee, and audit these inspectors to ensure
compliance with State requirements. Under this framework, MDE
licenses more than 650 accredited third-party inspectors, who
collectively submit more than 6,000 lead-free certificates each year for
rental properties across Maryland.
While the audit suggests that a documented process to verify certificates
issued by third-party inspectors does not exist, MDE maintains multiple
oversight mechanisms designed specifically to review inspector
performance and inspection records.
Page 2 of 27

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
These mechanisms led MDE to already identify and place the
contractors reviewed in the analysis for this finding under active
investigation prior to the audit’s initiation. In recognizing that fact, this
finding validates the effectiveness of MDE’s existing oversight
processes, as our internal controls successfully — and independently —
flagged these inspectors for enforcement action.
Notably, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 3 Land,
Chemicals, and Redevelopment Division commended MDE’s program,
noting in its FY2025 program review that “MDE continues to operate an
active and productive inspection program” that is “one of the most
robust in the country.”
In 2026, prior to receiving these audit findings, MDE proactively
introduced legislation that would require lead inspectors to obtain
insurance and/or bonding to promote greater professional responsibility
and ensure mechanisms are available to provide relief to property
owners adversely impacted by insufficient or improper inspections. As
of the submission of this audit, the General Assembly passed the bill,
and it is awaiting signature from the Governor.
MDE remains committed to protecting Maryland families and will
continue strengthening oversight of licensed inspectors.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MDE maintains a documented multi-layered oversight system, which
corrective action or includes:
explain disagreement.
● Random bi-weekly audits of inspection activity, weighted to
ensure geographic coverage across the State;
● Oversight based on tips and complaints, which may trigger
targeted compliance reviews or investigations;
● Desk audits conducted for every inspector during the two-year
accreditation renewal process, with discrepancies or deficiencies
leading to additional compliance actions, including site
inspections when warranted.
This oversight framework is consistent with how similar lead inspection
programs operate nationwide.
Page 3 of 27

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MDE concurs with this policy recommendation, which necessitates a
corrective action or revision of COMAR 26.16.02.05 to enhance the types of documentation
explain disagreement. third-party lead inspectors must submit to the agency when certifying
properties.
Within existing MDE authorities, the Department has already enhanced
verification and oversight systems used to review the approximately
6,000 lead-free certifications submitted annually by more than 650
independent certified inspectors.
As described above, MDE maintains a multi-layered oversight
framework that includes random bi-weekly audits of inspections,
reviews initiated through tips or complaints, and desk audits conducted
during each inspector’s two-year accreditation renewal process. These
mechanisms are designed to verify inspector performance and review
inspection documentation while ensuring compliance with applicable
state and federal requirements.
While achieving full independent verification of every submitted lead-
free certificate could require statutory changes, additional staffing, and
dedicated funding, MDE will continue strengthening oversight activities
and prioritizing inspections in cases involving confirmed elevated blood
lead levels in children, where the public health risk is greatest.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2026
Please provide details of MDE agrees that lead inspectors should be held accountable for issuing
corrective action or certifications that cannot be supported by appropriate inspection
explain disagreement. documentation.
Consistent with its existing authority, when MDE identifies unsupported
certifications or inspectors who fail to meet regulatory requirements, the
Department takes appropriate enforcement action. This may include
invalidating certifications, initiating investigations, and pursuing
disciplinary or enforcement actions when warranted.
In fact, prior to the issuance of this audit, MDE had initiated
investigations involving several inspectors associated with the
certificates reviewed for this finding. As part of ongoing enforcement
efforts, MDE also recently revoked more than 1,400 invalid certificates
Page 4 of 27

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
and referred contractors engaged in fraudulent activity for criminal
prosecution.
MDE remains committed to protecting Maryland families from lead
exposure and maintaining strong oversight and enforcement within the
State’s lead inspection program.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MDE agreed with our recommendations, MDE
noted the analysis was inaccurate because it had a documented process to verify
lead-free certificates issued by inspectors. Specifically, MDE stated that it
maintains multiple oversight mechanisms designed specifically to review
inspector performance and inspection records. However, documentation to
support these assertions was not provided despite numerous requests.
Furthermore, the duration and the magnitude of the questionable inspections
demonstrate the lack of comprehensive oversight of the inspection process.
Additionally, while MDE agreed with Recommendation 1a, it reiterated the
assertion that a multi-layered oversight system is maintained. As noted above,
documentation of this system was not provided. Consequently, we continue to
believe our finding is accurate and our recommendations are valid.
Page 5 of 27

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MDE did not timely notify property owners and tenants when it suspended
an inspector that had improperly issued lead-free and limited lead-free
certificates. In addition, MDE did not take sufficient action to ensure these
properties were re-inspected and that children residing in the properties
obtained lead blood-level testing.
We recommend that MDE
a. ensure all properties noted above are immediately re-inspected, as
required;
b. in the future, timely notify all property owners and tenants as soon as it
becomes aware of improperly issued certificates; and
c. follow-up with the tenants at properties with improperly issued
certificates (including those noted above) to determine if any children had
the recommended lead blood-level test.
Agency Response
Analysis Inaccurate
Please provide MDE’s response to learning that a lead inspection company (the
additional comments as “Company”) had improperly issued lead-free certifications complied
deemed necessary. fully with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 745.320–39,
which governs enforcement actions under federal lead programs.
After receiving information indicating possible inspection irregularities,
MDE initiated an investigation that ultimately uncovered the largest lead
inspection fraud case in the Department’s history, involving more than
1,400 improperly issued certificates. Addressing this case required
extensive investigative work to determine the scope of the fraud and to
build sufficient evidence to support enforcement actions and
notifications as the investigation progressed.
EPA Region 3 cited this enforcement action as an example of the
effectiveness of MDE’s program during its FY2025 program review,
stating:
MDE’s enforcement team are wrapping up two high-profile
cases: the enforcement against [the Company] for falsifying over
1,400 lead-free certificates mostly in Baltimore City: and
[another company] that contaminated lead-paint chips from
power-washing a television tower on Baltimore’s TV Hill. EPA
Page 6 of 27

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
commends MDE’s enforcement team for their vigilance and hard
work to protect the state from lead exposure and prevention of
lead poisoning.
As the forensic investigation systematically uncovered roughly 1,600
affected properties by early 2025, MDE immediately escalated its
response to match the expanding scope.
Uncovering the full extent of this fraud required a methodical
investigative process lasting approximately ten months, with each
discovery leading to additional evidence and investigative steps. MDE
could not legally invalidate certificates without substantiating these
allegations. Had MDE acted without proof, the fraudulent certificates
could have been reinstated on appeal, thus leaving families in unverified,
potentially hazardous homes. MDE took legally sustainable enforcement
actions, including the emergency suspension of the inspector and
company, the invalidation of thousands of inspection certificates, and
referral for criminal prosecution.
Throughout this process, tenants, property owners, Baltimore City
Health officials, Maryland Department of Health officials, and EPA
Region 3 were informed as the investigation developed and evidence
was confirmed.
Most importantly, MDE maintained its public health responsibilities
throughout the investigation. For the three children identified with
elevated blood lead levels at properties inspected by the Company, MDE
conducted complete environmental investigations within an average of
18 days after receiving the blood test results. MDE provided services to
those families, oversaw remediation of lead hazards, and remained in
contact with the affected households. As of today, the blood lead levels
for all three children are below the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) reference level of concern.
The timeline beginning on the next page illustrates the Department’s
actions as the investigation developed.
Page 7 of 27

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Timeline of Key Actions
Note: bold and underlined text highlights timely notification
Phase 1: Discovery and Initial Enforcement
(March – May 2024)
● March 5, 2024 – MDE received a report of an outdated XRF
lead-testing analyzer; immediate desktop audit and inspection
scheduling begins.
● March 22, 2024: MDE attempted an oversight inspection;
Company representatives failed to appear.
● April 3, 2024 – MDE conducted a surprise inspection and
directly observed the Company using an unlicensed XRF
machine.
● April 23, 2024 – MDE obtained an emergency license
suspension of the Company and its owner/operator.
● May 3, 2024 – MDE impounded the Company’s XRF analyzer.
● May 16, 2024 – MDE invalidated 89 lead-free certificates linked
to the improper use of the XRF analyzer and immediately
notified property owners and tenants.
Phase 2: Investigation and Evidence Gathering
(May – November 2024)
● May 28, 2024 – MDE subpoenaed 1,687 inspection documents
from the Company.
● June 2024 – Records review revealed evidence that some
inspection results had been copied and pasted across property
reports.
● August 2024 – MDE prepared a civil enforcement referral to the
Office of the Attorney General.
● November 4, 2024 – During the investigation, MDE received
notification of a child with an elevated blood lead level at a
property inspected by the Company, prompting further
investigation and testing.
Page 8 of 27

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Phase 3: Litigation and Public Health Response
(Nov 2024 – March 2025)
● November 15, 2024 – MDE and the Office of the Attorney
General filed a civil complaint in Circuit Court.
● January 30, 2025 – MDE confirmed lead hazards at an additional
property inspected by the Company.
● January 31, 2025 – MDE sent cautionary letters to
approximately 4,000 property owners and tenants whose
properties had been inspected by the Company, advising
owners to obtain new inspections and recommending blood
testing for children and pregnant women.
● March 19, 2025 – Baltimore City Circuit Court issued a default
order against the Company.
Phase 4: Final Action and Full Invalidation (July 2025)
● July 15, 2025 – MDE invalidated all lead inspection certificates
ever issued by the Company. MDE notified all property
owners and tenants and mandated re-inspections of all
properties.
Following these actions, the Company’s owner/operator was convicted
of criminal fraud based on the investigation initiated by MDE.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed,
Aug. 2025
Please provide details of On July 15, 2025, MDE sent by certified mail (with return receipts) a 30-
corrective action or day re-inspection notice to all affected properties. MDE continues to
explain disagreement. aggressively enforce compliance and ensure these properties have been
reinspected.
As of the time of this submission, 1,163 of the affected properties
(approximately 84%) have obtained new inspection certificates. MDE
has initiated noncompliance enforcement actions against 132 other
property owners who confirmed receipt of the invalid certificate notice
but have not yet submitted a valid lead inspection certificate.
Page 9 of 27

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
MDE continues to monitor compliance and ensure that all remaining
properties obtain valid inspections.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MDE already provides notification to property owners and tenants when
corrective action or inspection concerns arise. MDE rejects the premise of an administrative
explain disagreement. delay; the timeline reflects the expanding discovery of a massive,
concealed fraud.
In this case, MDE reviewed more than 2,000 inspections and sent
cautionary notices on January 31, 2025, to approximately 4,000 property
owners and tenants, advising them of the investigation and
recommending reinspection and blood testing where appropriate.
These actions occurred while the investigation was still developing and
before final enforcement actions were completed.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed,
Nov. 2024
Please provide details of MDE received laboratory notifications of all child blood lead test results
corrective action or as required under Maryland law.
explain disagreement.
When elevated blood lead levels were discovered, MDE immediately
notified the families and conducted environmental investigations. In
conjunction with Baltimore City and the Maryland Department of
Health, families with children that have elevated levels received home
inspections, educational material, and recommendations for reducing
lead levels. As a result of these actions, all three children have blood
lead levels safely below the CDC reference level.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MDE agreed with the recommendations, MDE
noted the analysis was inaccurate because it escalated its response as information
was uncovered during an investigation of the inspector. Our analysis
acknowledges that MDE took certain appropriate actions in response to this
situation. However, nothing in the response contradicts the findings in the
analysis that MDE did not timely notify virtually all of the impacted homeowners
and tenants until January 2025 approximately 10 months after suspending the
inspector’s license, did not ensure that the properties were reinspected, and did
Page 10 of 27

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
not ensure that children in the impacted homes were tested for lead. As a result,
we continue to believe the analysis is accurate and recommendations are valid.
Page 11 of 27

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MDE did not ensure that all registered rental units had a current lead
inspection certificate, as required, and did not investigate registered rental
units without a current inspection recorded on its automated system.
We recommend that MDE review the reports from the automated match of
registered rental units and related lead inspection certificates and take
appropriate corrective action to ensure inspections are completed as
required (repeat), including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Accurate
Please provide MDE acknowledges that the audit identified a technical data gap
additional comments as between two automated tracking systems used to monitor rental property
deemed necessary. registrations and lead inspection certificates. However, MDE notes that
this issue reflects a data reconciliation challenge rather than a lack of
oversight or enforcement.
MDE conducts daily audits of property registrations, and no property is
left unexamined due to this technical discrepancy.
Following the audit, MDE conducted an in-depth review of the 14,506
records flagged by OLA. This review determined that the majority of
these records were either compliant or already under Department review:
● 5,258 properties already had valid lead inspection certificates on
file;
● 6,029 records were duplicate entries within the automated
system;
● 2,484 properties were already subject to enforcement action or
had received a notice of violation.
As a result, of the 101,199 records reviewed by OLA, the number of
properties that required, and received, manual follow-up represents
approximately 0.7% of the total dataset.
The discrepancy identified by OLA primarily stems from formatting
differences between two separate databases:
Page 12 of 27

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
1. The system used by property owners to register rental units, and
2. The system used by certified inspectors to submit lead inspection
results.
For example, if a property owner registers a unit as “Apartment 1” and
the inspector records the same unit as “Unit 1,” the current systems may
not automatically match those entries.
Importantly, a data mismatch does not indicate that a property lacks a
valid inspection or presents a safety risk. Instead, such discrepancies
trigger manual review and reconciliation by MDE staff to verify
compliance.
MDE currently addresses these discrepancies through a three-phase
workflow, which includes:
1. Verification of inspection and registration records;
2. Notification and Notice of Violation where compliance issues are
identified;
3. Referral to the Office of the Attorney General for enforcement,
when necessary.
MDE is actively working to modernize and integrate its data systems to
eliminate these reconciliation challenges and further strengthen
automated oversight.
In the meantime, MDE will continue using targeted audits and manual
reconciliation processes to ensure that rental properties comply with
Maryland’s lead inspection requirements and that Maryland families
remain protected.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2026
Please provide details of MDE agrees that reports generated from the automated system match
corrective action or should continue to be reviewed and reconciled to ensure inspections are
explain disagreement. completed as required.
The Department will continue to analyze system-generated discrepancy
reports and take appropriate corrective action, including verification of
inspection records, issuance of violation notices when warranted, and
enforcement referrals when necessary.
Page 13 of 27

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
MDE is also pursuing system modernization efforts to improve
integration between the rental registration and inspection databases and
further reduce manual reconciliation needs.
Page 14 of 27

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Wastewater Discharge Permits
Finding 4
MDE did not review and approve wastewater discharge permits timely and
did not always conduct timely inspections of facilities, as required.
We recommend that MDE
a. ensure wastewater discharge permits are issued timely,
b. ensure the backlog of administratively continued permits noted above are
addressed in accordance with State law, and
c. inspect wastewater discharge facilities and administratively continued
permits timely, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis Accurate
Please provide The Moore–Miller Administration inherited a significant backlog in
additional comments as wastewater discharge permits. Since 2023, the Department has taken
deemed necessary. substantial steps to address this backlog and improve the timeliness of
permit issuance and inspections.
As of the date of this submission, all facilities indicated in this report are
in compliance in reporting Discharge Monitoring Reports on a monthly
basis to our agency. All major facilities have current inspections as of
this report’s publication. MDE has hired an additional 8 inspectors since
2024 and will eliminate the backlog in inspections of minor facilities by
November 2026.
MDE has implemented new performance metrics, process
improvements, and automation tools designed to improve permit
processing efficiency and reduce backlog.
In Fiscal Year 2024, MDE added 14 new permit-writing positions and
began filling those positions to increase the Department’s capacity to
process wastewater discharge permits. In coordination with the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, MDE also conducted a
comprehensive process improvement review of its permitting program.
This review identified opportunities to streamline internal procedures
and reduce permitting lead times.
Page 15 of 27

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
As a result of these efforts, the Department has made measurable
progress in reducing the backlog. MDE achieved a five-year high in
permit issuance, exceeding the historical average by 27%, and has
cleared 94% of the original backlog. Additionally, the rolling backlog of
permits was reduced from 45% in FY2023 to 23% in FY2025.
MDE is continuing to address remaining permits and expects to fully
eliminate the backlog before the December 31, 2026, deadline.
The Department is also strengthening inspection scheduling and
compliance tracking to ensure wastewater facilities are inspected in
accordance with federal requirements.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MDE agrees with the recommendation and will continue implementing
corrective action or measures to ensure wastewater discharge permits are issued and
explain disagreement. inspections are conducted in accordance with applicable federal
requirements.
The Department will continue to:
● Increase permitting capacity through staffing and process
improvements;
● Monitor permitting timelines using performance metrics;
● Improve inspection scheduling and tracking systems to ensure
inspections occur as required under federal law.
These ongoing efforts will allow MDE to sustain the progress already
made in reducing the backlog while maintaining compliance with federal
permitting and inspection requirements.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Nov. 2026
Please provide details of MDE agrees that corrective actions must be implemented, and the
corrective action or Department has cut the number of administratively extended permits
explain disagreement. nearly in half — from 44% in January 2023 to 23% in September 2025
— and cleared 81% of the original backlog identified in 2022. We are
on pace to eliminate the original backlog by December 2026 and
eliminate the backlog of more-recently extended permits by summer
2026. MDE has continued this progress while keeping up with new
permit expirations through record-high renewal productivity.
Page 16 of 27

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec. 2026
Please provide details of As noted above, MDE has taken significant steps to increase inspections
corrective action or at discharge-permitted facilities. Since FY2023, the Department has
explain disagreement. increased inspections by 38%, filled key vacancies, and expanded
technical resources to support compliance oversight.
These efforts have strengthened MDE’s inspection capacity and will
allow the Department to complete all federally required inspections and
eliminate remaining inspection backlogs by the end of 2026.
Page 17 of 27

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Radiation Machine Inspections
Finding 5
MDE did not inspect 1,311 radiation machines timely, as required.
We recommend that MDE ensure that radiation machines are inspected as
required.
Agency Response
Analysis Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2026
Please provide details of The Moore–Miller Administration inherited a significant backlog in
corrective action or radiation machine inspections. MDE agrees with the recommendation,
explain disagreement. and since 2023, the Department has taken substantial steps to rebuild
inspection capacity and reduce this backlog.
As of March 25, 2025, OLA identified 1,311 overdue inspections. Since
that time, MDE has reduced the backlog to only 18 machines, almost
completely eliminating the backlog and restoring a fully current
inspection schedule.
With the backlog nearly eliminated, MDE expects to complete all
remaining overdue inspections and maintain a fully current inspection
schedule by August 2026.
This backlog occurred during a period of significant staffing turnover
within MDE’s Radiological Health Program. In 2022, the Department
lost three of its six radiation machine inspectors, and due to the
specialized qualifications required for health physicists, it took until
early 2024 to restore the program to full staffing.
Since returning to full staffing, the Radiological Health team has
significantly increased inspection activity and is working to complete all
required inspections as quickly as possible.
Page 18 of 27

--- Page 47 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Importantly, patient and worker safety continued to be protected during
this period. MDE receives and reviews maintenance and performance
reports for radiation machines on an ongoing basis, providing an
additional layer of oversight. When issues are identified through these
reports, MDE directs facilities to take corrective action immediately.
Page 19 of 27

--- Page 48 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Purchasing and Personnel Transactions
Finding 6
MDE could not support the propriety of certain activity processed by or on
behalf of a senior management employee.
We recommend that MDE
a. ensure that salary transactions are properly justified and supported, and
b. perform documented analyses to justify future payments to membership
organizations to ensure they are in the best interests of the State.
Agency Response
Analysis Inaccurate
Please provide MDE’s review indicates that the documentation provided to OLA
additional comments as demonstrates that these transactions complied with applicable state
deemed necessary. policies and procedures.
Personnel Documentation
This audit questioned the documentation supporting a salary increase for
an employee promoted to serve as a special assistant to a senior
executive and suggested it may not be justified. However, the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) is the principal state
agency responsible for evaluating whether a promotion is justified. In
this matter, MDE submitted written justification to DBM, which
approved the request in writing.
The Secretary is authorized to request a salary exemption provided it
aligns with the State Personnel and Pensions Articles. Accordingly,
MDE acted within its authority by following DBM Salary Guidelines for
the Standard Pay Plan and in submitting this request. The audit does not
cite any established criteria, standards, or policy used to definitively
state this DBM-approved salary increase was not otherwise justified.
MDE maintains extensive documentation to support this personnel
action, including MS-22s, PEPs, Workday records, and a DBM-
approved promotion letter. The employee was reclassified because their
role changed, and the updated job description formally documents their
expanded administrative responsibilities.
Page 20 of 27

--- Page 49 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Organizational Membership
To the extent this finding questions the documentation and
decisionmaking process for MDE to join any organization, there are no
specific criteria, standards, or policy cited to assess objectively the
process or documentation required for a state agency to join an
organization.
To the extent this finding subjectively questions the merits of joining this
organization, an electric-vehicle (EV) and transportation advocacy
nonprofit, MDE maintains the membership is a highly cost-effective,
strategic investment directly tied to the state’s statutory climate
mandates.
● The transportation sector accounts for approximately 40% of
Maryland’s greenhouse gas emissions. Under the Climate
Solutions Now Act, Maryland is legally mandated to reduce
overall emissions by 60% by 2031. Accelerating EV adoption is
a critical operational component of Maryland’s strategy to meet
net-zero deadlines.
● The $25,000 membership allows MDE to leverage established
outside partnerships. This grants Maryland direct access to the
organization’s extensive national marketing campaigns,
providing significant promotion for EV adoption within the state.
● While there is no existing statutory requirement that dictates a
specific documentation format to justify agency memberships,
MDE conducted a rigorous internal review before these funds
were allocated. To demonstrate this return on investment, MDE
has produced documentation detailing the organization’s
marketing analyses, campaign materials, and resources to support
tangible benefits of this membership.
● Since MDE joined the organization, state agencies from three
other states with similar climate leadership commitments have
also joined.
Page 21 of 27

--- Page 50 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDE maintains documentation supporting personnel actions in
corrective action or accordance with state requirements. Documentation supporting the
explain disagreement. salary adjustment referenced in the audit include: MS-22 forms, PEP
documentation, Workday records, and a DBM-approved promotion
letter.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDE meticulously evaluates membership in external organizations to
corrective action or ensure such participation supports the Department’s mission and the
explain disagreement. interests of the State.
For future memberships, MDE will ensure that supporting analyses and
documentation are formally maintained to demonstrate the value and
purpose of such memberships. MDE has also created a new, standard
membership evaluation form administrators must use to approve
organizational membership decisions. While not required by policy,
MDE will utilize this form to standardize decisions to join, rejoin, or exit
organizations.
Auditor’s Comment: While MDE agreed with our recommendations, it
disagreed with the factual accuracy of the analysis. In regard to the salary
increase, MDE submitted a written justification to DBM, which approved the
request in writing. While DBM is responsible for approving the request, the
approval is based on assertions made by MDE which were not supported. The
response further indicates there was no criteria to support that the request was not
justified. As noted in our analysis, the basis for the request was not supported as
the employee’s responsibilities were already included in the new job description
for which the employee had already received a salary increase. Finally, during
our fieldwork we reviewed all of the documents referenced in the response which
do not contradict but rather support the conclusions reached in our analysis.
In regard to the $25,000 payment, MDE states that there was no specific criteria
to assess objectively the process or documentation required for a state agency to
join an organization and maintains that the membership is a highly cost-effective,
strategic investment. However, MDE could not provide documentation during or
subsequent to our fieldwork detailing the organization’s marketing analyses,
campaign materials, and resources to support tangible benefits of this membership
prior to making the payment. Furthermore, as noted in MDE’s response, no other
Page 22 of 27

--- Page 51 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
states participated until after MDE joined the organization. The lack of this
documentation combined with the management employee serving on the public
policy board for the organization is the basis of our finding and raises concerns
about the propriety of the payment. As a result, we continue to believe that our
finding is accurate and MDE should maintain documentation, such as analyses, to
justify payments to membership organizations to ensure they are in the best
interest of the State.
Page 23 of 27

--- Page 52 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
A management employee’s secondary employment with a State university
doing business with MDE potentially violated State ethics law.
We recommend that MDE refer the potential violation of State ethics law to
the Commission and take action to comply with any decisions that the
Commission provides on this matter.
Agency Response
Analysis Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Feb. 2026
Please provide details of Upon learning of the matter referenced in this finding, MDE
corrective action or immediately conducted an internal review and submitted an expedited
explain disagreement. request to the Maryland State Ethics Commission to evaluate the
circumstances and provide guidance. MDE has remained in contact with
the Commission, which had not yet reviewed the matter as of the time of
this submission.
MDE also promptly informed OLA that the matter had been referred to
the Ethics Commission and that the agency will fully comply with any
determination or recommendations issued by the Commission.
Finally, MDE notes that the employee served in a junior, non-
decisionmaking capacity when the referenced MOU was negotiated and
approved.
Page 24 of 27

--- Page 53 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
MDE did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement regulations.
We recommend that MDE publish contract awards on eMMA as required,
including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDE acknowledges the audit finding and has taken corrective action.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. All outstanding contract awards identified in the audit have now been
successfully published on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA).
In addition, MDE has updated and strengthened its standard operating
procedures (SOPs) to ensure that all future contract awards are recorded
in eMMA within the required 30-day timeframe.
These procedural updates include improved internal tracking and review
processes to ensure compliance with state procurement regulations.
MDE agrees with the recommendation and will continue to ensure that
contract awards are published on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
(eMMA) in accordance with state procurement requirements.
Page 25 of 27

--- Page 54 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 9 and 10 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDE’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, MDE’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 26 of 27

--- Page 55 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Accounts Receivable
Finding 11
MDE did not ensure its accounts receivable records were complete and
accurate, and timely pursue collections, as required.
We recommend that MDE
a. reconcile its account receivable records to corresponding amounts in
State records, to identify and correct any errors noted, including those
noted above; and
b. timely send all dunning notices and refer delinquent accounts to CCU as
required, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Dec. 2025
Please provide details of MDE has already reconciled accounts receivable records and corrected
corrective action or all errors identified. MDE has successfully moved to a more efficient,
explain disagreement. centralized finance system where all account reconciliations are
performed by our expert Fiscal Office rather than within individual
administrations.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Dec. 2025
Please provide details of MDE has taken decisive action to strengthen our billing processes and
corrective action or ensure every dollar owed to the State is accounted for; as of December
explain disagreement. 31, 2025, all outstanding invoices have been cleared to zero, and all
delinquent account referrals are now 100% current.
Page 27 of 27

--- Page 56 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Mindy R. Garrett
Thea A. Chimento, CFE
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Joshua H. Leff
Samantha J. Rhea
Amy C. Roberts
John E. Rooney
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditors