Title: Review of the Findings and Report by the State Chief Information Security Officer of Actions Taken by Six Agencies to Resolve Certain Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report
Date: 2026-04-28
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=69f10cfb8f0ef9aad726c30f
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:08:08.747279
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 28, 2026
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing James Senate Office Building, Room 220
11 Bladen Street 11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
House Appropriations Committee Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Taylor House Office Building, Room 121 Lowe House Office Building, Room 312
6 Bladen Street 6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with a requirement contained in the April 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report
(JCR), pages 74 and 75, the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the findings and
report by the State Chief Information Security Officer (SCISO) of actions taken by six agencies
to resolve certain repeat audit findings in calendar year 2024 OLA audit reports.
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $250,000 of the appropriation made for the
purpose of Executive Direction for the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) for fiscal
year 2026, the six agencies must meet with the SCISO concerning their repeat cybersecurity1
findings. The meeting was to identify and document a path for resolution of any outstanding
issues and to confirm that the agencies have taken corrective action with respect to their
cybersecurity audit findings, including articulating any ongoing associated costs and a timeline
for resolution if the corrective action is not complete.
The JCR required the SCISO to submit a report to OLA by February 1, 2026 addressing
corrective actions taken, a path and timeline for resolution of any outstanding issues, and any
ongoing costs associated with corrective actions. The JCR also provided that OLA submit a
1 The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), as processes
or capabilities wherein systems, communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation. Cybersecurity-related findings are designated by OLA using
our professional judgment and a conservative interpretation of this definition.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 28, 2026
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
report by May 1, 2026 to the budget committees and the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
listing each repeat audit finding, along with information that demonstrates the agencies’
commitment to correct each repeat audit finding.
In accordance with the JCR requirement, the SCISO provided a report, dated February
2026, summarizing its assessment of the actions taken by the six agencies with respect to the
repeat audit findings. The report noted that the agencies met with the SCISO and/or the
Governance, Risk and Compliance team.
Based on our review of the conclusions summarized in the SCISO’s report and additional
information provided, it is our opinion that all agencies have taken sufficient corrective actions
to resolve their respective repeat findings or have committed to an agreed upon corrective action
plan with the SCISO for each repeat finding. Our conclusions were based on the information
reported and did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. We also did not review the reported actions at each of the six
agencies to ensure they were implemented and were effective in establishing sufficient
cybersecurity controls to address the concerns noted in the findings. Such efforts will be
included in our next scheduled audits of these agencies.
This public letter differs from the confidential letter previously provided to the
addressees, as detailed information and exhibits necessary for the budget committees and the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee to review and comment on the relevant information has
been redacted. This redaction was undertaken in accordance with the State Government Article
Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
We advised DoIT and DBM of the results of our review. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended by DoIT and DBM during this review.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if
you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- April 28, 2026
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair
cc: Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Joseline A. Peña-Melnyk, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Yaakov Weissmann, Esq., Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Katie Olson Savage, Department of Information Technology
James Saunders, State Chief Information Security Officer, Department of Information
Technology
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services