Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of Health - Developmental Disabilities Administration to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2025 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 2026-05-12
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a03a407bb2c873a4b6b99b3
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:07:43.696209
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 12, 2026
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Taylor House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) – Developmental Disabilities Administration
(DDA) to resolve the four repeat findings (that were addressed by eight recommendations)
in our October 26, 2022 audit report. This review was conducted in accordance with a
requirement specified in the April 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), pages 154 and
155.
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $250,000 of its administrative
appropriation for fiscal year 2026, DDA must take corrective action on all repeat audit
findings on or before November 1, 2025. The JCR further provided that OLA submit a
report to the budget committees listing each audit finding along with a determination that
each finding was corrected.
MDH, on behalf of DDA, provided a status report to OLA, dated November 2025,
detailing corrective actions that had been implemented with respect to the four repeat audit
findings (Exhibit 1). This MDH status report indicated that corrective actions had been
completed for the recommendations in findings 2, 3, and 6, and that corrective action to
address the recommendations for finding 1 was still in progress.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- May 12, 2026
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
In accordance with the JCR requirement, we reviewed the implementation status for
the three repeat findings which MDH reported as complete on the status report and held
discussions with DDA personnel as necessary to assess the implementation status of the
related recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards and had we conducted an audit,
other matters may have come to our attention which may have changed our assessment of
the implementation status for these findings. In addition, our review did not include an
assessment of DDA’s procedures and controls to ensure corrective actions were operating
as intended and were ongoing. Accordingly, conditions may change and/or compliance
with policies and procedures may deteriorate in the future. The status of each of the
findings are subject to a comprehensive review during our scheduled audit of DDA.
As summarized in Exhibit 2, while MDH indicates that finding 1 is still in progress,
we concur with MDH’s assessment that it had taken sufficient action to fully correct
findings 2, 3, and 6.
After discussing our review results, DDA generally agreed with the accuracy of the
information presented. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the
review by DDA. We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement.
Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Joseline A. Peña-Melnyk, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Yaakov Weissmann, Esq., Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Meena Seshamani, M.D., Ph.D., MDH
Deputy Secretary Marlana R. Hutchinson, DDA
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Audit Supervisor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Victoria Martinez, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA NOTE 1: In February 2026 DDA provided additional details related to its
corrective actions, which are included in the comments below.
OLA NOTE 2: We have edited DDA’s status report to remove links to online
documents, as allowed by our policy.
Note: All status updates below build upon the updates previously shared with OLA in November
2023.1 For brevity, DDA has generally not reiterated those prior updates here, though they
remain ongoing and relevant to the completion status of these recommendations. For example,
DDA continues to work with the Quality Improvement Organization whose services were
procured beginning in July 2022. Updates included below reflect new work completed since the
prior update.
Consumer Services
Finding 1
DDA did not ensure that Coordination of Community Services (CCS) agencies properly
completed annual consumer service plans and conducted quarterly face-to-face monitoring
visits.
Recommendation 1b
We recommend that DDA establish a process to ensure that CCS agencies provide all
critical services to consumers in accordance with State regulations. Specifically, DDA
should ensure that the CCS agencies complete all quarterly monitoring forms as required
for each consumer (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 1b
Status as of 2/20/2026 In progress Completion Date: 4/30/26
DDA is still actively working to address OLA’s recommendations.2
(Note - updates for this recommendation that were shared in our
previous quarterly update, in November 2025, are italicized; new
Please provide details of updates are presented in standard text).
corrective action taken.
DDA has taken several additional steps to educate CCS agencies
and participants about their monitoring and follow-up
1 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2024, May 8).
May 8, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen.
https://ola.maryland.gov/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663d222dff1f3f431b00641a.
2 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2025, June). Audit
Report: Maryland Department of Health, Developmental Disabilities Administration.
https://dls.maryland.gov/pubs/prod/NoPblTabPDF/DDA25.pdf.

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
responsibilities and to document these responsibilities. Prior
reported activities are in italics.:
● In June 2023, DDA issued CSS Monitoring and Follow-Up
Guidance. This guidance identifies various participant
circumstances and describes the expected monitoring
frequency, monitoring activities, and monitoring due date for
each circumstance.
● In August 2023, DDA held a training for CCS agencies
covering the above guidance. Slides remain available online
on DDA’s CCS resources page.
● Beginning in January 2025, DDA formalized standing
monthly meetings with CCS agencies (see “CCS Monthly
Meetings”). These provide an opportunity to share
information and review data and metrics. There are both a
statewide meeting with all CCS agencies and one-on-one
meetings with individual agencies. In the one-on-one
meetings, DDA staff help identify trends and barriers that
may prevent agencies from meeting their performance
measures and provide targeted technical assistance.
● In June 2025, DDA created a service-level agreement to be
completed by all CCS agencies, which will enhance DDA’s
ability to hold CCS agencies accountable, specifically
regarding the enabling of withholding or clawback of
funding. Some follow-up steps remain to finalize and issue
this document (see section below: Moving Forward).
● DDA is requiring Coordinators of Community Services to
include comprehensive documentation within their activity
notes within LTSSMaryland. Activity notes must
specifically document that participants were receiving the
required services and their progress on achieving personal
goals and outcomes. DDA communicated this requirement
at the statewide Coordination of Community Services
meeting on 10/21/25 and additionally through GovDelivery.
DDA will continue training on these interim requirements
until updates to the Monitoring and Follow-up form in
LTSSMaryland are completed (see the section below:
Moving Forward).
● In December 2025, DDA issued an update to the “DDA
Funded Services Participant Rights and Responsibilities”
document to clarify participants’ role for participating in
monitoring and follow-up visits with their CCS.
● In January 2026, DDA began more formally reviewing data
and reports with CCS agencies during monthly one-on-one

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
meetings. This comprehensive, data-driven process uses
reports in LTSSMaryland to track CCS monitoring activities
and ensure their completion. The data pulls use the
LTSSMaryland Coordination of Community Services
Waiver report, the Coordination of Community Services
Monitoring Form Report, and the Coordination of
Community Services Client Roster report to extract data for
each Coordination of Community Services agency. The
Division Chief of Coordination of Community Services
trained the Coordination of Community Services Squad on
relevant data pulls, analysis, and technical assistance
processes on 10/24/25. These reviews will take place on a
quarterly cadence (e.g., January 2026 meetings reviewed
January 2026 data; February meetings will review January
and February; March meetings will review the entire quarter,
January through March; April meetings will review April
data; and so on). Some follow-up steps remain to complete
the initial cycle of this process and document/revise
procedures (see section below: Moving Forward).
DDA has also developed a standard process for its Quality
Improvement Organization (QIO), Liberty Healthcare, to review
CCS agencies’ compliance with DDA standards, including
monitoring and follow-up requirements. This standard operating
procedure was issued in January 2023 and revised in October 2023
to include guidance regarding Corrective Action Plans (CAP).
Liberty has now been implementing the CAP process for over a
year. DDA is currently revising and updating this SOP (see the
section below: Moving Forward).
DDA has visibility into the QIO’s work to ensure that it is being
completed as planned. Specifically, the QIO Targeted Case
Management review standard operating procedure specifies that the
QIO will send an aggregate findings report to each CCS agency
within 15 business days of the end of each review period, and that
the QIO must also send this report to the DDA QIO Program
Manager. The procedure also directs the QIO to share
documentation of corrective action plans with the DDA Program
Manager. DDA also receives a monthly senior leadership briefing
from the QIO. Finally, the Coordination of Community Services
Squad actively collaborates with the QIO to identify Coordination of
Community Services agencies that are not meeting compliance, and
provides additional technical assistance.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Moving Forward
1. DDA will complete the first cycle of formal data reviews
(conducted during monthly one-on-one meetings with CCS
agencies) in March 2026. In March and April 2026, DDA
will create an SOP to document this process and will make
updates to reflect lessons learned from initial
implementation.
2. DDA will establish a Service Level Agreement with CCS
agencies to enable the implementation of performance
expectations and corrective action plans. The Service Level
Agreement will be required at the time of certification
renewal for each Coordination of Community Services
agency. As of February 23, 2026, DDA has received
certification renewal applications from all CCS agencies
currently serving DDA participants and has provided
technical assistance to resolve outstanding issues that would
prevent approval. Once approved, DDA will work with the
CCS agencies to finalize their certification renewals and to
get their signatures on the Service Level Agreement. DDA
anticipates this being completed by the end of April 2026.
3. DDA is updating the QIO Targeted Case Management
Review Standard Operating Procedure. The SOP updates
will include additional details on expected statistical
sampling, when to request a Corrective Action Plan, and
how DDA will process recoupments for unsupported
payments. DDA anticipates the revised SOP will be effective
by the end of March 2026.
4. An update to the monitoring and follow-up form currently
utilized within LTSSMaryland will be done to allow for a
more comprehensive review and documentation of
Coordination of Community Services monitoring activities.
DDA is currently outlining the scope of this update so that a
request can be submitted to FEI (the software company
contracted by the State to develop and maintain
LTSSMaryland). In the meantime, DDA oversees CCS
agencies’ completion of monitoring & follow-up activities
through monthly one-on-one data review meetings.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 1c
We recommend that DDA establish a process to ensure that CCS agencies provide all
critical services to consumers in accordance with State regulations. Specifically, DDA
should ensure that the CCS agencies complete quarterly monitoring forms which contain
detailed comments regarding consumers’ progress on achieving personal goals and
outcomes (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 1c
Status as of 11/1/2025 In progress Completion Date: 4/30/26
See 1b above.
Please provide details of
corrective action taken.
Finding 2
DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure the amounts invoiced by CCS agencies
properly reflected consumer services provided and did not take appropriate action when a
significant number of improper or unsupported payments were identified.
Recommendation 2a
We recommend that DDA establish a comprehensive review process to ensure that CCS
agency billings are proper (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2a
Status as of 11/1/2025 Completed Completion Date: 6/2025
DDA considers this recommendation completed as of June 2025, as
OLA did not note it as a repeat finding in the June 2025 follow-up
audit.3 As described in the November 2023 status update4, DDA
Please provide details of contracted with a Quality Improvement Organization (QIO) to
corrective action taken. conduct Targeted Case Management reviews, which include a
review of billing claims to ensure they are for billable activities and
supported by activity notes recorded in LTSSMaryland. These QIO
reviews remain ongoing.
3 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2025, June). Audit
Report: Maryland Department of Health, Developmental Disabilities Administration.
https://dls.maryland.gov/pubs/prod/NoPblTabPDF/DDA25.pdf.
4 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2024, May 8).
May 8, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen.
https://ola.maryland.gov/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663d222dff1f3f431b00641a.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
DDA notes that it is currently strengthening CCS accountability for
these reviews. This includes development and execution of Service
Level Agreements for each CCS agency as well as updates to the
QIO Targeted Case Management Review Standard Operating
Procedure (see 1a above).
Provider Payments
Finding 3
DDA did not conduct required audits of providers to ensure payments were for services
actually delivered and included in the consumers’ approved plans.
Recommendation 3a
We recommend that DDA conduct audits of providers to ensure payments to providers
were consistent with actual services delivered and in accordance with the consumers’
approved plans (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3a
Status as of 11/1/2025 Completed Completion Date: 6/2025
DDA considers this recommendation completed as of June 2025, as
OLA did not note it as a repeat finding in the June 2025 follow-up
audit.5
Please provide details of
As shared in the November 2023 status update,6 DDA continues to
corrective action taken.
work with its contracted Quality Improvement Organization (QIO),
which has continued reviewing provider payment propriety for both
service delivery models as part of its Utilization and Qualified
Provider reviews. DDA also continues to conduct quality assurance
via sampling to validate the QIO reviews.
5 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2025, June). Audit
Report: Maryland Department of Health, Developmental Disabilities Administration.
https://dls.maryland.gov/pubs/prod/NoPblTabPDF/DDA25.pdf.
6 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2024, May 8).
May 8, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen.
https://ola.maryland.gov/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663d222dff1f3f431b00641a.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Fiscal Management Services (FMS)
Finding 6
FMS services contracts procured in 2006 were not comprehensive, properly approved, and
adequately monitored. As a result, DDA did not recover unspent funds totaling $3.2
million and obtain federal reimbursements totaling $8.8 million.
Recommendation 6a
We recommend that DDA ensure contracts are executed that include all relevant contract
provisions (including the contract term and authorized administrative fees) (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6a
Status as of 11/1/2025 Completed Completion Date: 10/31/2023
This recommendation was already noted as completed in the
November 2023 update.7
However, DDA notes that it is taking additional steps relevant to this
recommendation in response to OLA’s 2025 audit8:
● Beginning in January 2026, DDA began holding bi-weekly
(every two weeks) meetings with all of its contract monitors
and representatives from the MDH Office of Contract
Please provide details of
corrective action taken. Management and Procurement to discuss the status of current
contracts and upcoming renewals and procurements.
● As of February 2026, DDA is developing standard operating
procedures and a policy instructional statement relevant to
contracting and procurement policies and oversight. These
will ensure DDA alignment with Procurement Processing
Standards established by the MDH Office of Contract
Management and Procurement in May 2025. Among other
things, these documents will ensure that contracts are
competitively procured and that documented price
negotiations are conducted, as appropriate. DDA anticipates
that these will be issued by the end of March 2026.
7 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2024, May 8).
May 8, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen.
https://ola.maryland.gov/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663d222dff1f3f431b00641a.
8 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2025, June). Audit
Report: Maryland Department of Health, Developmental Disabilities Administration.
https://dls.maryland.gov/pubs/prod/NoPblTabPDF/DDA25.pdf.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 6b
We recommend that DDA monitor vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key
requirements and terms are complied with, including site visits and audits, and timely
return of unspent funds, and that FMS vendor payments are proper and supported
(repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6b
Status as of 11/1/2025 Completed Completion Date: 6/2025
DDA considers this recommendation completed as of June 2025, as
OLA did not note it as a repeat finding in the June 2025 follow-up
audit.9 Please note that the “timely return of unspent funds” portion
of the recommendation is no longer relevant, as Financial
Management and Counseling Services (FMCS) vendors now bill on a
fee-for-service basis (see also 6c below).
DDA notes the additional work below that has been taking place
since the November 2023 update:
● DDA’s contracted Quality Improvement Organization (QIO)
began reviewing FMCS vendor payments as part of its
Utilization and Qualified Provider reviews in January 2024.
Please provide details of
These reviews contain several checks to ensure that payments
corrective action taken.
are proper and supported, including: 1) verification that
licensed providers met required licensure and/or certification
standards; 2) verification that non-licensed providers adhered
to waiver requirements; 3) verification that provider training
was conducted in accordance with state and waiver
requirements; and 4) verification that services were rendered
as described in participant planning documents.
● DDA has continued to regularly meet with FMCS vendors
collectively and individually every two weeks (the collective
meeting takes place one week and then individual meetings
take place the following week, alternating). During these
meetings, DDA reviews any forthcoming or proposed updates
that will impact the FMCS vendors. The FMCS vendors are
asked for their feedback and for operational plans to support
program implementation. If there is a common thread of
concern, the parties work collectively to find a resolution,
9 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2025, June).
Audit Report: Maryland Department of Health, Developmental Disabilities Administration.
https://dls.maryland.gov/pubs/prod/NoPblTabPDF/DDA25.pdf.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
such as sending a clarifying communication to the public or to
FMCS vendors.
● DDA is currently in the process of recruiting an FMCS
Program Manager. As of February 2026, an offer has been
extended, and DDA anticipates a start date being set for
March 2026.
● DDA has developed a standard operating procedure to
document its reviews of FMCS administrative payments (the
per participant per month fees noted in their fee schedule),
and anticipates finalizing this SOP in March 2026.
Recommendation 6c
We recommend that DDA ensure FMS vendors record all provider payments into MMIS II
timely (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6c
Status as of 11/1/2025 Completed Completion Date: 6/2025
DDA considers this recommendation completed as of June 2025, as
OLA did not note it as a repeat finding in the June 2025 follow-up
audit.10
Please provide details of This finding and recommendation were related to the prospective
corrective action taken. payment model managed through the PCIS2 billing system.
However, DDA’s Financial Management and Counseling Services
(FMCS) vendors began billing fee-for-service with direct electronic
claims submission to MMIS as early as October 2022. Under the fee-
for-service system, FMCS vendors do not get reimbursed by DDA if
claims are not submitted within the timely filing limit.
Recommendation 6d
We recommend that DDA take appropriate corrective action to recover unspent funds and
obtain available federal reimbursement for any outstanding claims (including the
aforementioned $8.8 million), and consider recovering any lost investment income resulting
from untimely vendor actions (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6d
Status as of 11/1/2025 Completed Completion Date: 6/2025
10 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2025, June).
Audit Report: Maryland Department of Health, Developmental Disabilities Administration.
https://dls.maryland.gov/pubs/prod/NoPblTabPDF/DDA25.pdf.

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
DDA considers this recommendation completed as of June 2025, as
OLA did not note it as a repeat finding in the June 2025 follow-up
audit.11
Please provide details of
corrective action taken.
DDA does not have any additional updates beyond what was shared
in the November 2023 status update.12 DDA does not believe there
are any outstanding funds to be collected.
11 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2025, June).
Audit Report: Maryland Department of Health, Developmental Disabilities Administration.
https://dls.maryland.gov/pubs/prod/NoPblTabPDF/DDA25.pdf.
12 Maryland General Assembly, Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits. (2024, May 8).
May 8, 2024 Letter to Joint Chairmen.
https://ola.maryland.gov/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=663d222dff1f3f431b00641a.

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA)
October 26, 2022 Audit Report on the Maryland Department of Health –
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA)
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to DDA Reported Status Based on
Repeat Findings Status OLA Review
Consumer Services
1. We recommend that DDA
establish a process to ensure that
CCS agencies provide all critical
services to consumers in
In Progress
accordance with State regulations. -
Specifically, DDA should ensure
that the CCS agencies complete
b. all quarterly monitoring
forms as required for each
consumer.
c. quarterly monitoring forms
which contain detailed
comments regarding
In Progress
-
consumers’ progress on
achieving personal goals and
outcomes.
2. We recommend that DDA
a. establish a comprehensive
Completed
review process to ensure that Resolved
CCS agency billings are
proper.
Provider Payments
3. We recommend that DDA
a. conduct audits of providers to
ensure payments to providers
Completed
Resolved
were consistent with actual
services delivered and in
accordance with the
consumers’ approved plans.

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA)
October 26, 2022 Audit Report on the Maryland Department of Health –
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA)
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to DDA Reported Status Based on
Repeat Findings Status OLA Review
Fiscal Management Services (FMS13)
6. We recommend that DDA
a. ensure contracts are executed
that include all relevant
Completed
Resolved
contract provisions
(including the contract term
and authorized administrative
fees).
b. monitor vendor activity and
compliance to ensure that all
key requirements and terms
are complied with, including
Completed
site visits and audits, and Resolved
timely return of unspent
funds, and that FMS vendor
payments are proper and
supported.
c. ensure FMS vendors record
Completed
all provider payments into Resolved
MMIS II timely.
d. take appropriate corrective
action to recover unspent
funds and obtain available
federal reimbursement for
any outstanding claims
(including the
Completed
Resolved
aforementioned $8.8
million), and consider
recovering any lost
investment income resulting
from untimely vendor
actions.
13 The FMS vendors discussed in our finding are now referred to by MDH as Financial Management and
Counseling Services (FMCS) vendors.