Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Information Technology to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2025 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 2026-05-12
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a03a42abb2c873a4b6bce38
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:07:52.073376
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 12, 2026
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Taylor House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) to resolve the eight repeat audit findings (that
were addressed by 12 recommendations) in our March 29, 2024 audit report. This review was
conducted in accordance with a requirement specified in the April 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report
(JCR), pages 87 and 88.
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $250,000 of its administrative appropriation
for fiscal year 2026, DoIT must take corrective action on all repeat audit findings on or before
November 1, 2025. The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget
committees listing each repeat audit finding along with a determination that each repeat finding
was corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget
committees to review and release the funds prior to the end of the fiscal year. Certain detailed
information and exhibits have been deemed cybersecurity related and therefore have been
redacted in accordance with the State Government Article Section 2-1224(i), of the Annotated
Code of Maryland
DoIT provided a status report to OLA, dated November 1, 2025, detailing corrective
actions that had been implemented with respect to the eight repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1).
The DoIT status report indicated that corrective action was in progress for at least some of the
recommendations for the non-cybersecurity-related findings.
In accordance with State law, the status of the cybersecurity-related findings have been
redacted.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- May 12, 2026
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
After discussing our review results, DoIT generally agreed with the accuracy of the
information presented. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the
review by DoIT. We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please
contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Joseline A. Peña-Melnyk, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Yaakov Weissmann, Esq., Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Katie Olson Savage, Department of Information Technology
James L. Saunders, State Chief Information Security Officer, Department of Information
Technology
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Yashodhara Rai, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Major Information Technology Development Projects (MITDPs)
Finding 2
DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they were on budget and on schedule
and that changes to the scope and cost of the project were appropriate.
Recommendation 2a
We recommend that DoIT ensure annual ITPRs are submitted by State agencies, and that
DoIT reviews and approves them prior to submitting it to DBM and DLS for budget
analysis purposes (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
06/30/24
11/1/2025
The current process allows for DoIT review and approval of annual
ITPRs to be performed in a timely manner, as long as State agencies
are submitting these reports on time, prior to DBM and DLS reviews
for budget analysis purposes. House Bill 738/Senate Bill 705 also gives
DoIT more authority to hold agencies accountable when they do not
meet oversight requirements, as defined and set forth in DoIT policy
and procedures, including missing deadlines.
DoIT continues to refine our processes on an ongoing basis, focusing
on enhancements that support to ensure that annual ITPRs are
Please provide details
submitted by State agencies timely. Since this finding was initially
of corrective action
taken. closed, DoIT has implemented the following improvements as well:
● Implemented new tools to make submitting, reviewing, and reading
ITPRs easier.
● Updated the ITPR collection and review process and timeline to
allow more time for review and discussion with agencies.
● Changed the funding structure and ITPR requirements for new
projects.
With these changes, all except one project submitted their FY27 ITPRs
on time and that one exception was blocked by forces beyond their
control.
Recommendation 2d
We recommend that DoIT require the OPMs to ensure monthly health assessments are
provided by State agencies, verify the accuracy of information reported, and provide
justifications for the risk ratings (repeat).

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Recommendation 2d
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
06/30/24
11/1/2025
The monthly health assessment process has been enhanced to provide a
green / yellow / red rating on defined criteria. Additionally, OAs are
independently providing an assessment of the rating to ensure the
Please provide details information provided by agencies is justified and accurate to our
of corrective action knowledge. Projects that fail to submit the monthly reports are
taken. escalated to agency leadership. If projects do not submit the required
information on project expenses, generally included in the month
reports, these expenses are not reimbursed by ITIF. These changes
were implemented in spring 2024.
Finding 4
DoIT could not support cost data and conclusions included in its annual report submitted
to the Governor, DBM, and General Assembly; and did not always include changes in
schedule, cost, and other identified problems with MITDPs, as required by State law.
Recommendation 4a
We recommend that DoIT ensure that its annual reports include accurate estimated costs
to complete (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 4a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
06/30/24
11/1/2025
DoIT has implemented new review steps of midyear and end-of-year
reports to ensure that they reflect the latest information DoIT has
received on projects.
In addition, DoIT has taken the following corrective actions to ensure
actual and projected costs are as accurate as reasonably possible:
● Require agencies to include expenditure data in monthly health
Please provide details
checks
of corrective action
taken. ● DoIT implemented a monthly review of FMIS GENT reports of
MITDP expenditures to the agency reported amounts
These new procedures help to ensure actual costs incurred are reported
correctly. This, along with additional enhancements to processes, as
noted in response to Finding 2, help ensure estimated costs to complete
projects are as accurate as reasonably possible. All information used to

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
develop and that support information in the annual report will be
retained for future reference. In the future, much of this information
will be stored in the new PMIS the team is planning.
DoIT continues to refine our processes on an ongoing basis. Since this
finding was initially closed, DoIT has implemented the following
improvements as well:
● Standardized the rebaseline process agencies must follow to increase
the expected cost of any MITDP
● Added a new section to the FY25 end-of-year report. Each project
narrative now includes an addendum providing any new information
learned about that project between the end of FY25 and when the
report draft is finalized (September 30, 2025). Any additional changes
that happen between October 1, 2025 and November 1, 2025, when the
report is delivered, will be reflected in the forthcoming mid-year report
delivered in January 2026.
Information Systems Security and Control and Enterprise Services
The Information Systems Security and Control and Enterprise Services section, including
findings 11 through 14, has been deemed to contain cybersecurity-related information and
audit findings and was redacted from the publicly available report and correspondence.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Status of Recommendation 11
Status as of Completion Date:
11/1/2025
Please provide details
of corrective action Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
taken.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Status of Recommendation 12a
Status as of Completion Date:
11/1/2025
Please provide details
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
of corrective action
taken.
Status of Recommendation 12b
Status as of Completion Date:
11/1/2025
Please provide details
of corrective action Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
taken.
Status of Recommendation 12c
Status as of Completion Date:
11/1/2025
Please provide details
of corrective action Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
taken.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Status of Recommendation 13a
Status as of Completion Date:
11/1/2025

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Please provide details
of corrective action Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
taken.
Status of Recommendation 13b
Status as of Completion Date:
11/1/2025
Please provide details
of corrective action Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
taken.
Finding 14
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Status of Recommendation 14
Status as of Completion Date:
11/1/2025
Please provide details
of corrective action Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
taken.
Enterprise Technology Support Services (ETSS)
Finding 15
DoIT did not have formal written agreements with 57 of the 130 State and local entities
receiving ETSS and did not recover $4.8 million from nine entities with agreements for
services provided.
Recommendation 15a
We recommend that DoIT enter into formal MOUs with all agencies for which it provides
ETSS. The MOU should clarify DoIT and agency responsibilities, specific services to be
provided by each, and a mechanism to provide for the cost of these services (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 15a

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status as of In Progress (91% Complete) Completion Date:
TBD
11/1/2025
DoIT has created a revised enterprise services MOU that addresses the
areas noted by the auditors and has made significant progress in getting
signatures from all 79 units of government that have a legislative
appropriation for DoIT services. To date, DoIT has executed MOUs
with 72 out of 79 agreements. While DoIT continues to follow up and
make contact, the following units of government have been non-
responsive: Department of Legislative Services, MD Stadium
Please provide details Authority, Canal Place Preserve Authority, Property Tax Assessments
of corrective action
Appeal Board, St. Mary’s College of MD, University of MD System,
taken.
and Maryland Environmental Science.
It is important to note that there is not a separate MOU for the Boards
and Commissions (D15), which is rolled into the Governor’s
Coordinating Offices and falls under their MOU. The DoIT (F50)
budget includes a legislative appropriation for DoIT services. There is
not an MOU related to this, and DoIT has not been included in the 79
units of government noted above.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Equipment
Finding 16
DoIT did not adequately control its equipment inventory and did not maintain accurate
detail records.
Recommendation 16a
We recommend that DoIT comply with the requirements of the DGS Inventory Control
Manual by conducting annual independent physical inventories (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 16a
Status as of In Progress Completion Date:
12/31/25
11/1/2025
On August 5th, DoIT received approval from DGS to use its deployed
IT asset management system to update the existing automated
Please provide details
processes for the inventory of IT equipment after six (6) months of
of corrective action
taken. collaboration. DoIT is currently working through the integration and
sample data collection and expects to have this completed by the end
of the calendar year.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) March 29, 2024
Audit Report on the Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Status Based on
DoIT Reported Status
Findings OLA Review
Major Information Technology Development
Projects
2. We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure annual Information Technology
Project Requests are submitted by State
Completed Resolved
agencies, and that DoIT reviews and
approves them prior to submitting it to the
Department of Budget and Management
and the Department of Legislative Services
for budget analysis purposes.
d. require the oversight project managers to
ensure monthly health assessments are
provided by State agencies, verify the Completed Resolved
accuracy of information reported, and
provide justifications for the risk ratings.
4. We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure that its annual reports include
accurate estimated costs to complete and Completed Resolved
retain documentation to support the
amounts reported.
Information Systems Security and Control Enterprise Services1
11. Status Redacted.
12. Status Redacted.
13. Status Redacted.
14. Status Redacted.
1 Specific information related to cybersecurity-related findings 11, 12, 13, and 14 has been redacted for the publicly
available report in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) March 29, 2024
Audit Report on the Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Status Based on
DoIT Reported Status
Findings OLA Review
Enterprise Technology Support Services
(ETSS)
15. We recommend that DoIT
a. enter into formal memorandum of
understanding (MOUs) with all agencies
In Progress --
for which it provides ETSS. The MOU
should clarify DoIT and agency
responsibilities, specific services to be
provided by each, and a mechanism to
provide for the cost of these services.
Equipment
16. We recommend that DoIT comply with the
requirements of the Department of General
In Progress --
Services Inventory Control Manual by
a. conducting annual independent physical
inventories.