Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Human Services - Family Investment Administration to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2025 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 2026-05-12
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a03a3f6bb2c873a4b6b7f75
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:08:00.664496
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 12, 2026
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Taylor House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the
Department of Human Services (DHS) - Family Investment Administration (FIA) to
resolve the five repeat findings (that were addressed by eight recommendations) in our
October 21, 2022 audit report. This review was conducted in accordance with a
requirement specified in the April 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page 193.
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $250,000 of its administrative
appropriation for fiscal year 2026, DHS FIA must take corrective action on all repeat audit
findings on or before November 1, 2025. The JCR further provided that OLA submit a
report to the budget committees listing each audit finding along with a determination that
each finding was corrected.
DHS on behalf of FIA provided a status report to OLA, dated October 31, 2025,
detailing certain corrective actions that had been completed with respect to all five repeat
audit findings (Exhibit 1). The DHS status report indicated that corrective actions had
been completed for the recommendations on all the repeat findings (findings 2, 6, 7, 9, and
10).
In accordance with the JCR requirement, we reviewed the implementation status for
the five repeat findings which DHS reported as complete on the status report and held
discussions with FIA personnel as necessary to assess the implementation status of the

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- May 12, 2026
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
related recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards and had we conducted an audit,
other matters may have come to our attention which may have changed our assessment of
the implementation status for these findings. In addition, our review did not include an
assessment of FIA’s procedures and controls to ensure corrective actions were operating as
intended and were ongoing. Accordingly, conditions may change and/or compliance with
policies and procedures may deteriorate in the future. The status of each of the findings are
subject to a comprehensive review during our scheduled audit of FIA.
As summarized in Exhibit 2, our review determined that FIA took sufficient action
to resolve the recommendations for findings 6 and 10 but contrary to the reported status,
had not yet taken sufficient action to implement the recommendations for findings 2, 7, and
9 as further described in Exhibit 3.
We shared our results with FIA, which generally disagreed with our assessment.
We reviewed our work and believe that our assessment correctly represent the current
implementation status for the findings as outlined in Exhibit 3. We wish to acknowledge
the cooperation extended to us during the review by FIA. We trust our response
satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if you need additional
information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Joseline A. Peña-Melnyk, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Yaakov Weissmann, Esq., Department of Budget and Management
Acting Secretary Stacy L. Rodgers, Department of Human Services
Augustin Ntabaganyimana, Executive Director, FIA
Marva M. Sutherland, Inspector General, DHS
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Tonya D. Zimmerman, Operating Budget Manager, Department of Legislative
Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA)
Finding 2
FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving TCA benefits beyond the five years
allowed by federal and State regulations.
Recommendation 2a
We recommend that FIA comply with existing federal and State regulations by terminating
TCA benefits to all recipients after five years unless a documented hardship exemption and
related independence plan is prepared and approved, as required (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
Nov 2023
11/1/2025
In December 2023, AT#24-24 was issued outlining system
enhancements for processing hardship exemptions when TCA
recipients reach their 60-month benefit limit.
24-24 60 Month Hardship Exemption1
An on-demand 60+ Month Report/Dashboard was developed for local
departments to see the cases approaching the 60-month limit.
Please provide details
of corrective action
taken.
FIA will continue to monitor a sample of TCA cases that reach 60
months on a monthly basis to ensure the local departments are
following the policy and procedures for TCA 60-month cases.
The monthly sampling serves as an ongoing compliance check,
creating accountability for local departments to follow the standardized
procedures. While no system is fail-proof, the combination of early
warning mechanisms and regular oversight reduces the likelihood of
widespread non-compliance going undetected for extended periods.
1 We have edited FIA’s status report to remove weblinks, as allowed by our policy.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 2b
We recommend that FIA determine the extent of improper payments and, in conjunction
with the federal granting agency, develop a plan to address any amounts improperly
recovered from the federal granting agency, and notify the General Assembly budget
committees and the Department of Budget and Management of the extent of State
payments made in violation of the aforementioned State regulations (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2b
Status as of Resolved Completion Date:
N/A
11/1/2025
At the time of the audit, we confirmed that the recipients were eligible
to receive TCA benefits based on hardship with the exception of 3
cases, which were being assessed for further action accordingly. To
date, we have subsequently confirmed the identified cases were also
eligible for a hardship exemption.
For the cases cited, the evidence of hardship was not always
consistently documented in the case file. For example, medical
documentation was in the case file to identify a disability that meets
the criteria for hardship, but the hardship form was not completed by
the local department. FIA has taken measures to ensure the
documentation for hardship is adequately included in the case file. FIA
has conducted case worker training and issued written guidance on the
Please provide details
proper documentation of hardship.
of corrective action
taken.
The system changes that were made also ensure that evidence of
hardship exemption is uploaded before the benefit can continue beyond
the 60-month time limit. A report of cases that exceeded the 60-month
time limit was compiled and shared with the locals, including
instructions to assess the recipient's situation, document the hardship,
and upload the documentation into E&E via the Enterprise Content
Management System (ECMS).
FIA does conduct a monthly TCA 60-month case review to see if the
required documentation is in the case file. Based on the reviews
conducted, it appears that compliance in this area is improving.
Additionally, the recently implemented system enhancements will help
to further improve documentation collection.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Follow-up on Computer Matches
Finding 6
FIA did not ensure that all social security number (SSN) alerts were recorded in CARES
for follow-up purposes.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that FIA ensure all SSN match alerts are properly recorded in
the system for follow up (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
March 2025
11/1/2025
SSN alerts are currently in good standing.
FIA started to closely monitor missing SSN reports in October 2024,
with weekly summaries of outstanding cases shared with Local
Departments of Social Service (LDSS) leadership. LDSS departments
were given 90 days to address their backlogs. Action Transmittal 25-
07, regarding Missing or Invalid Social Security Numbers, was
published in January 2025, followed by comprehensive training on the
transmittal in the same month. Subsequently, each local department
that did not meet the January 2025 deadline submitted a Corrective
Action Plan.
Since the implementation of the ongoing monitoring process,
Please provide details substantial progress has been achieved. Between November 1, 2024,
of corrective action and February 28, 2025, the weekly average of outstanding alerts was
taken. 1,591. This average declined to 173 during the period of March 1
through June 30, 2025, representing an 89 percent reduction from the
first quarter. Moreover, for the period of July 1 through September 30,
2025, the weekly average further decreased to 47, marking a 97 percent
reduction compared to the initial quarter. A chart depicting the
progress to date is attached for reference.
We have a Weekly Overdue Missing SSN Graph to show the progress.
As such, FIA is confident OLA will clear this finding when the current
audit concludes.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 7
FIA did not ensure that the Local Department of Social Services (LDSSs) conducted timely
and appropriate follow-up on Public Assistance Reporting Information System (PARIS)
alerts. Our review disclosed that the LDSSs did not take timely or appropriate action for
43 of the 46 alerts we tested.
Recommendation 7a
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs PARIS alert activity to ensure that the LDSSs
conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of PARIS alerts (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
March 2025
11/1/2025
On March 24, 2025, policy guidance was issued regarding New Hire,
Death, Prison, and PARIS Data Match Requirements. 25-03 AT
Revised New Hire Death Prison PARIS Data Matches Requirements.
25-03 Revised New Hire, Death, Prison, and Public Assistance
Reporting Information System (PARIS) Data Matches Requirements
Actions Taken/Completed:
● Based on clarification from our federal partners, PARIS alerts
should only be generated and addressed at certification and
recertification.
● An updated FIA Action Transmittal (AT) addressing how to
Please provide details properly handle PARIS matches has been developed for
of corrective action distribution.
taken. ● A review of PARIS alerts are included in the SNAP ME review
process to ensure appropriate follow-up action is taken.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 7b
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs PARIS alert activity to ensure that the LDSSs
update the system and case notes for unreported income identified by the PARIS reports
(repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7b
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
March 2025
11/1/2025
On March 24, 2025, policy guidance was issued regarding New Hire,
Death, Prison, and PARIS Data Match Requirements. 25-03 AT
Revised New Hire Death Prison PARIS Data Matches Requirements.
25-03 Revised New Hire, Death, Prison, and Public Assistance
Reporting Information System (PARIS) Data Matches Requirements
Please provide details
of corrective action
taken. Actions Taken/Completed:
● Based on clarification from our federal partners, PARIS alerts
should only be generated and addressed at certification and
recertification.
● A review of PARIS alerts is included in the SNAP ME review
process to ensure appropriate follow-up action is taken.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 9
FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and agreements related to its public
assistance programs.
Recommendation 9a
We recommend that FIA obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records,
timesheets, and receipts, to verify the accuracy of billings, as required by policy (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 9a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
June 2023
11/1/2025
Actions/Taken/Completed:
Please provide details
of corrective action ● All vendors and grantees are required to submit supporting
taken. documentation with all invoices. The contract manager must
provide the vendor outcomes within the Quarterly Report and

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
proof of monitoring along with the invoice and supporting
documentation for approval of payment.
● The Emergency Food Program is using the updated standard
operating procedure (SOP) to reflect that supporting documents
must accompany all invoices for payment, rather than on a test
basis. The Emergency Food Program held meetings in smaller
groups with all vendors to introduce the practice of providing
supporting documentation with every invoice. Meetings are
held individually if technical assistance is needed.
● Each contract is monitored differently and is consistent with
FIA’s Contract Monitoring and Invoice Protocol. The protocol
was implemented to improve contract and invoice monitoring.
FIA continues to work on improving our contract monitoring
and invoice processing.
● DHS is using the established protocol for receiving and
reviewing invoices prior to payment.
● A process to independently verify grant funds were spent as
intended by obtaining and reviewing documentation to support
the propriety of payments was established on February 7, 2023.
FIA has obtained the requested documentation and has
reviewed the applicable supporting documentation for
expenditures, such as timesheets, which support the personnel-
related expenditures.
Recommendation 9c
We recommend that FIA in conjunction with DHS, formally determine which entity is
responsible for LDSS contract oversight and establish processes to oversee and approve
LDSS public assistance contracts and agreements to ensure that the related invoices are
consistent with the agreements and that the agreed-upon services are received (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 9c
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
March 2024
11/1/2025
Actions/Taken/Completed:
● FIA developed a three-pronged strategy to address this concern.
The strategy included the provision of periodic training to local
contract managers who are responsible for drafting scopes of
Please provide details
work, reviewing invoices, processing invoices, and monitoring
of corrective action
contracts. It also included a plan to develop a central team to
taken.
provide oversight of local contracts and ongoing technical
assistance. Two of the three prongs, including technical
assistance and ongoing training have been implemented.
● FIA has established a process for reviewing and signing off on
LDSS contracts.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
● FIA has established and implemented an annual contract
compliance training and provides ongoing technical assistance
to local contract managers.
● FIA follows the April 2023, DHS issued memo titled
“Delegation of Signatory Authority for Agreements by the
Secretary of the Maryland Department of Human Services
(DHS)” where the Secretary may delegate authority to execute
certain agreements, contracts, memoranda of understanding
(“MOU”), etc. Under the new guidance, all contracts with a
value of $100,000 or above must be reviewed and approved by
the Secretary.
● Each LDSS was requested to submit a SOP for contract
monitoring by November 1, 2024. All SOPs were received by
that date. FIA reimplemented monitoring meetings for TCA:
Monthly for technical assistance (2 hrs), and annual meetings
for overall program accountability to the submitted and
approved budget and Partnership for Achieving Self
Sufficiency (PASS) Plan (about half-day). FIA reinstated this
TCA monitoring tool to support annual meetings. FIA’s Cash
Programs office designated a vacancy for a dedicated
contracted monitor position.

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Grants Management
Finding 10
FIA did not obtain supporting documentation to support grant funds were spent as
intended.
Recommendation 10a
We recommend that FIA independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are
spent as intended by obtaining and reviewing documentation to support the propriety of
payments (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 10a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
June 2023
11/1/2025
Actions Taken/Completed Through June 2023:
● All vendors and grantees are required to submit supporting
documentation with all invoices. The contract manager must
provide the vendor outcomes within the Quarterly Report, and
proof of monitoring along with the invoice and supporting
documentation for approval of payment.
● The Emergency Food Program updated the SOP along with
Attachment A to reflect that supporting documents must
accompany all invoices for payment rather than on a test basis.
● The Emergency Food Program held meetings in smaller groups
with all vendors to introduce the practice of providing
supporting documentation with every invoice.
As such, FIA is confident OLA will clear this finding when the current
Please provide details
audit concludes.
of corrective action
taken.

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) October 21,
2022 Audit Report on the Department of Human Services (DHS) – Family
Investment Administration (FIA)
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat DHS Reported Status Based on
Findings Status OLA Review
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA)
2. We recommend that FIA
a. comply with existing federal and State
regulations by terminating TCA benefits to Not Resolved
Completed
all recipients after five years unless a (In Progress)
documented hardship exemption and related
independence plan is prepared and approved,
as required.
b. determine the extent of improper payments
and, in conjunction with the federal granting
agency, develop a plan to address any
amounts improperly recovered from the
federal granting agency, and notify the
Not Resolved
Completed
General Assembly budget committees and
(In Progress)
the Department of Budget and Management
of the extent of State payments made in
violation of the aforementioned State
regulations.
Follow-up on Computer Matches
6. We recommend that FIA ensure all Social
Completed Resolved
Security Number match alerts are properly
recorded in the system for follow-up.
7. We recommend that FIA monitor Local
Departments of Social Services (LDSSs)
Public Assistance Reporting Information
Not Resolved
System (PARIS) alert activity to ensure that Completed
(In Progress)
the LDSSs
a. conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of
PARIS alerts.
b. update the system and case notes for
Completed Resolved
unreported income identified by the PARIS
reports.

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) October 21,
2022 Audit Report on the Department of Human Services (DHS) – Family
Investment Administration (FIA)
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to DHS Reported Status Based on
Repeat Findings Status OLA Review
Contract Monitoring
9. We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, Not Resolved
Completed
including payroll records, timesheets, (In Progress)
and receipts, to verify the accuracy of
billings, as required by policy.
c. in conjunction with DHS, formally
determine which entity is responsible
for LDSS contract oversight and
establish processes to oversee and
Not Resolved
Completed
approve LDSS public assistance
(In Progress)
contracts and agreements to ensure that
the related invoices are consistent with
the agreements and that the agreed-
upon services are received.
Grant Management
10. We recommend that FIA
a. independently verify, at least on a test
Completed Resolved
basis, that grant funds are spent as
intended by obtaining and reviewing
documentation to support the propriety
of payments.

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Comments on Findings OLA Assessed as Unresolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 2
We recommend that Family Investment Administration (FIA)
a. comply with existing federal and State regulations by terminating Temporary
Cash Assistance (TCA) benefits to all recipients after five years unless a
documented hardship exemption and related independence plan is prepared and
approved, as required (repeat);
b. determine the extent of improper payments and, in conjunction with the federal
granting agency, develop a plan to address any amounts improperly recovered
from the federal granting agency, and notify the General Assembly budget
committees and the Department of Budget and Management of the extent of State
payments made in violation of the aforementioned State regulations (repeat);
Status as Determined by DHS - Completed
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
In regard to recommendation a, our review disclosed that FIA did not ensure that the Local
Departments of Social Services (LDSSs) terminated TCA benefits after five years unless
the recipients had a documented hardship exemption and independence plan in accordance
with federal and State regulations. Subsequent to the implementation date noted in FIA’s
status report (November 2023), our test of 34 recipients receiving TCA benefits beyond the
five-year period as of April 2025 disclosed that the LDSSs did not document a hardship
exemption and/or the required independence plan for 15 recipients. According to FIA
records, benefits received by these 15 recipients past the five-year limit totaled $1.1
million.
In regard to recommendation b, FIA investigated the 9 cases identified in our prior report
and determined that no funds were improperly recovered from the federal government.
However, FIA did not determine the extent of improper payments by reviewing additional
cases and as noted above, our current review disclosed additional recipients who continued
to receive TCA benefits beyond five years.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 7
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs Public Assistance Reporting Information
System (PARIS) alert activity to ensure that the LDSSs
a. conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of PARIS alerts (repeat).

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 12, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Comments on Findings OLA Assessed as Unresolved
Status as Determined by DHS - Completed
OLA Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that while FIA advised that it monitored the LDSSs’ PARIS alert
activity during its quality assurance reviews of each LDSS, FIA could not document that it
had reviewed any PARIS alerts through this process. In this regard, our test of 20 PARIS
alerts disclosed that 15 alerts were not resolved within 30 days as required. In addition, the
LDSSs did not document the actions taken to resolve 14 alerts, such as closing the case in
one state and recouping the benefits.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 9
We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records, timesheets, and
receipts, to verify the accuracy of billings, as required by policy (repeat); and
c. in conjunction with DHS, formally determine which entity is responsible for LDSS
contract oversight and establish processes to oversee and approve LDSS public
assistance contracts and agreements to ensure that the related invoices are
consistent with the agreements and that the agreed-upon services are received
(repeat).
Status as Determined by DHS - Completed
OLA Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
In regard to recommendation a, our review disclosed that FIA did not always obtain
adequate documentation to verify the accuracy of contractor billings. Specifically, our test
of 15 invoices totaling $49.3 million from 5 contracts totaling $144.4 million disclosed that
FIA did not obtain documentation to support that deliverables were received and that
amounts invoiced were proper for 8 invoices totaling $9.9 million related to four contracts.
In regard to recommendation c, as of March 2026, DHS and FIA had not formally
determined whether oversight of LDSS contracts was the responsibility of FIA or the
individual LDSSs. Although FIA indicated that it established a process for reviewing
LDSS contracts, our review disclosed that FIA lacked comprehensive records to enable
effective oversight. Specifically, FIA could not readily provide a list of LDSS contracts
related to the Temporary Disability Assistance Program and Home Energy Assistance
Program, and FIA’s list of contracts for the TCA program did not include any procurements
by five LDSSs. Furthermore, FIA did not review invoices for the LDSS contracts, even on
a test basis, to ensure the billings were proper and that the services were received.