Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Unemployment Insurance to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2025 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 2026-05-14
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a061eecb057f6202a276bd5
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:07:34.793602
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 14, 2026
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Taylor House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the Maryland
Department of Labor (MDL) Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) to resolve three of the
repeat findings (that were addressed by 4 recommendations) in our November 15, 2022 audit
report. This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement specified in the April 2025
Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), pages 201 and 202.
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $250,000 of its administrative appropriation
for fiscal year 2026, MDL must take corrective action on these repeat audit findings on or before
November 1, 2025. The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget
committees listing each repeat audit finding along with a determination that each repeat finding
was corrected.
MDL on behalf of DUI provided a status report to OLA, dated November, 2025, detailing
certain corrective actions that had been completed and actions that were ongoing with respect to
the three repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1). The MDL status report indicated that corrective
actions had been completed for the recommendations on these three repeat findings (findings 2,
6, and 7).

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- May 14, 2026
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
In accordance with the JCR requirement, we reviewed the implementation status for the
three repeat findings which MDL reported as complete on the status report and held discussions
with DUI personnel as necessary to assess the implementation status of the related
recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards and had we conducted an audit, other matters
may have come to our attention which may have changed our assessment of the implementation
status for these findings. In addition, our review did not include an assessment of DUI’s
procedures and controls to ensure corrective actions were operating as intended and were
ongoing. Accordingly, conditions may change and/or compliance with policies and procedures
may deteriorate in the future. The status of each of the findings are subject to a comprehensive
review during our scheduled audit of DUI.
As summarized in Exhibit 2, our review determined that contrary to the reported status,
DUI had not yet taken sufficient action to implement the recommendations for the three findings
as further described in Exhibit 3.
We shared our results with DUI, which agreed with our assessment of findings 6 and 7
but disagreed with our assessment of finding 2. We reviewed our work and believe that our
assessment correctly represents the current implementation status for the finding as outlined in
Exhibit 3. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review by DUI.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if you
need additional information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Joseline A. Peña-Melnyk, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Yaakov Weissmann, Esq., Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Portia Y. Wu, Esq., MDL
Deputy Secretary Jason Perkins-Cohen, MDL and Acting Assistant Secretary for DUI
Samuel K. Pannoh, Director, Office of Program Analysis and Audit, MDL
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Connor Brown, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
100 S. Charles Street Tower 1, 9th Floor
Baltimore, MD 21201
Portia Wu, Secretary
November 12, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Re: Status Report on JCR’s Request Regarding Repeat Findings in OLA, November 15, 2022,
Audit Report – Maryland Division of Unemployment Insurance
Dear Mr. Tanen:
We are submitting a completed status report template that outlines the corrective actions
taken to address all repeat findings identified in the November 15, 2022, audit report. We
believe these corrective actions will resolve all repeat findings after your review.
Thank you for your support and guidance during the audit process. We look forward to
hearing from you soon.
Sincerely,
Portia Wu
Cc: Rachel Torres, Assistant Secretary, Division of Unemployment Insurance Attachment -
Completed Status Report Template

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA NOTE 1: The JCR only required OLA to report on findings related to
Benefit Payments. Accordingly, we did not assess the implementation status
reported by DUI for finding 3.
OLA NOTE 2: We have edited DUI’s status report to remove certain employee
names, as allowed by our policy.
Finding 2
DUI did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that individuals filing claims using a
foreign Internet Protocol (IP) address were eligible to receive benefits, including 3,724
claimants that received benefit payments totaling $3.6 million.
Recommendation 2c
We recommend that DUI investigate the foreign IP addresses identified in this finding and
take corrective action for any ineligible claimants and benefits identified (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2c
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
August 2, 2023
11/1/2025
Status: Completed
DUI investigated a sample of the foreign IP addresses identified by the
auditors in connection with “telecerts” (weekly certifications submitted
via telephone to the claim center) from the legacy unemployment
insurance system. The audit findings cover the period from September
2017 through April 2020.
When DUI began its investigation in November 2022, 2,816 of the
identified payments were already outside the statute of limitations for
Please provide
establishing an overpayment determination. Under § 8-809(f)(2) of the
details of
Labor & Employment Article, Annotated Code of Maryland, DUI is
corrective action
prohibited from issuing a benefit overpayment determination more than
taken.
three years after the date benefits were paid to a claimant.
DUI could review the remaining payments that were within the statutory
period as of November 2022; however, given the time elapsed, all
claims are now beyond the allowable period for corrective action.
Moreover, since these claims were processed in the legacy system prior
to the launch of BEACON 2.0, there is no data available in BEACON
2.0 to analyze the use of foreign IP addresses. Conducting a
retrospective investigation would require extensive manual outreach to
claimants who likely have not filed since 2017–2020, and whose contact

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
information may be outdated. This would require significant staff
resources with no potential corrective outcome, given the statutory bar.
While no further action can be taken on these legacy claims, DUI has
implemented preventive measures in the BEACON 2.0 system.
BEACON now automatically blocks claims filed from foreign IP
addresses, preventing similar occurrences in the future. These controls
have effectively eliminated the risk of improper claims being filed
through foreign IP addresses.
Finding 3
DUI did not ensure claimants who were full-time students were eligible for benefits, and
that all claimants were enrolled in the Maryland Workforce Exchange System, as required.
Recommendation 3a
We recommend that DUI establish procedures, such as periodic matches to State higher
education institution enrollment records, to identify and follow up on claimants who are
attending school full-time but fail to disclose it (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3a
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
March 31, 2025
11/1/2025
Status: Completed
DUI has thoroughly explored this issue and the information previously
Please provide provided.
details of corrective
action taken.
Between August 2022 and January 2023, DUI met with representatives
from the Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center (MLDSC), the
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC), and the Jacob
France Institute (JFI) to explore potential data-sharing mechanisms. All
entities advised that non-aggregate student data could not legally be
shared due to FERPA restrictions and the lack of an applicable
education-related exception.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
DUI also reached out to the University System of Maryland and St.
Mary’s College of Maryland, both of which confirmed they could not
provide non-aggregate enrollment data.
DUI had a Google Meet meeting with MLDSC on August 16, 2022,
from 11:30-12:30. Attendees informed DUI that MLDSC cannot share
non-aggregate data due to privacy requirements.
DUI had a Google Meet with MHEC on January 20, 2023, from 1:00-
2:00. During that meeting, DUI was informed that MHEC could not
share the information we are seeking due to FERPA and the fact that
DUI’s use of the requested information was not educational in nature.
DUI had a Google Meet with JFI on January 31, 2023, from 1:00-
2:00. During that meeting, JFI representatives redirected DUI to
MHEC.
In March 2024, DUI further communicated to OLA the legal constraints
that preclude implementation of this recommendation. Although
directory information may be disclosed under 20 U.S.C. §
1232g(b)(1)(E), disclosure is discretionary, and institutions must first
provide notice and opt-out opportunities to students. Additionally, there
is no mechanism for cross-matching claimant information against
student enrollment records, as there is no central repository of directory
information.
Obtaining and attempting to match enrollment data from any
educational institution on a weekly basis in situations where a student
fails to disclose their enrollment status would be administratively
infeasible and resource-intensive. Given these legal and operational
limitations, DUI cannot implement this recommendation as written.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
However, DUI continues to ensure compliance through existing
eligibility verification processes within BEACON, including claimant
self-certifications and staff review of school attendance information
when disclosed. As with other claims, if DUI determines that a
claimant knowingly failed to disclose or misrepresented their status as
a student to obtain or increase a benefit payment, DUI treats that as
fraud and takes corrective action under § 8-809(b) of the Labor &
Employment Article.
Recommendation 3b
We recommend that DUI follow up on all applicants who state they are attending school to
determine whether it impacts eligibility for unemployment benefits (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3b
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
March 31, 2024
11/1/2025
Status: Completed
Please provide
DUI has required, and continues to require, all claimants who report
details of corrective
attending school in BEACON to answer additional eligibility questions,
action taken.
including with respect to their ability to work and availability for work.
Claims staff review these responses to determine whether school
attendance affects eligibility. If necessary, staff initiate adjudication to
verify whether the claimant meets the statutory eligibility requirements
under Maryland law.
Recommendation 3c
We recommend that DUI verify that all claimants comply with applicable enrollment
requirements, including the Maryland Workforce Exchange system (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3c

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
March 16, 2024
11/1/2025
Status: Completed
The technical issue in BEACON that previously prevented action items
Please provide from being created when DUI was notified by DWDAL that a claimant
details of corrective had not completed the Maryland Workforce Exchange (MWE)
action taken. registration was resolved on March 16, 2024.
DUI now automatically creates an action item when notified by
DWDAL of a missing MWE registration. This action item instructs the
claimant to complete registration and provides detailed guidance for
doing so. As a result, DUI now has a functional, automated control
system that ensures compliance with MWE registration requirements.
Recommendation 3d
We recommend that DUI take timely and appropriate corrective action for any potentially
ineligible claimants or benefits identified, including those noted in this finding (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3d
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
March 15, 2024
11/1/2025
Status: Completed
Please provide
details of corrective
action taken.
DUI takes timely corrective action whenever claimants are identified
as potentially ineligible due to factors such as school attendance or
failure to complete MWE registration. Corrective actions include
issuing fact-finding requests, adjudicating eligibility, and establishing
overpayments when appropriate. With BEACON’s enhanced

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
automation and improved coordination with DWDAL, DUI can now
act promptly to prevent or recover improper payments.
Claims Processing
Finding 6
DUI did not adequately review regular claims and adjudications processed by claims center
DUI employees and temporary staff, and output reports of manual wage entries could not
be generated from BEACON for verification purposes.
Recommendation 6a
We recommend that DUI ensure that supervisors at claim centers perform the required
reviews of claims processed (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 6a
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
November 30, 2023
11/1/2025
Status: Completed
DUI implemented a formal policy in November 2023 requiring
supervisors to review claims processed by claims center staff. The
Please provide
audit review conducted in September 2023 occurred prior to the
details of corrective
implementation of this policy.
action taken.
The new policy specifies the frequency and scope of supervisory
reviews to ensure quality assurance, while recognizing that not all
claims require review. Future audit evaluations should account for this
policy’s implementation and scope limitations.
Finding 7
DUI did not establish sufficient controls over reissued debit cards, and did not ensure the
proper disposition of funds remaining on expired debit cards.
Recommendation 7a
We recommend that DUI establish procedures to ensure all reissued debit cards are subject
to an independent review and approval (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7a

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
June 5, 2021
11/1/2025
Status: Completed
DUI no longer uses debit cards for administering benefit payments.
We have a clear policy for the reissuance of benefit payments.
Payment may only be reissued after confirmation that a check has not
Please provide
been cashed. An investigation is performed by staff after
details of corrective
communication with the claimant. Once that investigation is complete
action taken.
to reissue a check, the decision to reissue payment is made by the
supervisor in the Benefit Payment Control Unit. Reissuance data is
automatically reported and can subsequently be reviewed in BEACON
as well.
Recommendation 7c
We recommend that DUI establish procedures to ensure unspent funds remaining on debit
cards are returned to DUI or reported to the State Comptroller as unclaimed property in
accordance with the Maryland Unemployment Benefits Debit Card Deposit Agreement
(repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7c
Status as of Select Status Completion Date:
March 31,2022
11/1/2025
Status: Completed
DUI no longer uses debit cards to pay out benefits.
With regard to unspent funds which were held by the bank on
“frozen” debit card accounts (i.e. frozen due to suspected improper
payment or fraud or for claimants subsequently deemed ineligible,
Please provide
etc.), this matter was resolved by a letter agreement between DUI and
details of corrective
the Bank on July 10, 2025, which provided for the return of frozen
action taken.
funds. Where appropriate, frozen funds have been or will be returned
to the United States Treasury accounts corresponding to the federal
programs under which the benefits were initially paid.
DUI has no legal authority to recover “unspent” funds on debit card
accounts not identified as being associated with potentially fraudulent,
improperly paid, or otherwise ineligible claims. Pursuant to the Letter

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Agreement, the Bank will continue to administer these funds in
accordance with applicable law, including State escheatment
requirements.

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s November 15, 2022
Audit Report on the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) –
Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI)
MDL Reported Status Based
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat
Status on OLA
Findings
Review
Benefit Payments
2. We recommend that DUI
c. investigate the foreign IP addresses Not Resolved
Completed
identified in this finding and take corrective (In Progress)
action for any ineligible claimants and
benefits identified.
Claims Processing
6. We recommend that DUI
Not Resolved
a. ensure that supervisors at claim centers Completed
(In Progress)
perform the required reviews of claims
processed.
Claims Processing
7. We recommend that DUI establish procedures to
ensure Completed Resolved
a. all reissued debit cards are subject to an
independent review and approval.
c. unspent funds remaining on debit cards are
returned to DUI or reported to the State
Not Resolved
Comptroller as unclaimed property in Completed
(In Progress)
accordance with the aforementioned
Agreement.

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Comments on Findings OLA Assessed as Unresolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 2
We recommend that DUI
c. investigate the foreign IP addresses identified in this finding and take corrective action
for any ineligible claimants and benefits identified (repeat).
Status as Determined by MDL - Completed
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that DUI has not taken any action to address this recommendation since
our May 13, 2024 letter to the Joint Chairmen. During our current review, DUI could not
provide documentation of any investigation into the IP addresses including the timing and results
of any such investigation. DUI indicated in its current status report that when it began its
investigation in November 2022, 2,816 of the identified payments were already outside the three-
year statute of limitations and no action could be taken to recover any improper benefit
payments.
As noted in our May 13, 2024 letter, as of the date of our audit report (November 15, 2022),
approximately $609,454 in claim payments relating to the IP addresses in question had not yet
exceeded the statute of limitations and could have been subject to corrective action if found to be
improper in a timely manner. DUI’s current status report stated that it could have reviewed the
remaining payments that were within the statutory period as of November 2022; however, given
the time elapsed, all claims are now beyond the allowable period for corrective action. As a
result, the status of this recommendation could not be considered resolved.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 6
We recommend that DUI
a. ensure that supervisors at claim centers perform the required reviews of claims
processed (repeat).
Status as Determined by MDL - Completed
OLA Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that DUI policy effective December 2023 only required supervisors to
strive to review 5 claims and/or adjudications of each employee per week but did not require the
reviews. In addition, DUI did not have a process to track and monitor the reviews to ensure they
were being conducted. In this regard, our test of reviews conducted during weeks subsequent to
the implementation date referenced in DUI’s status report (November 2023) at each of the four
claims centers disclosed that one claim center had not conducted any of the reviews and the other
three claim centers’ reviews did not include claims processed by certain team members. In
addition, MDL’s response to our most recent audit report dated January 6, 2026, indicated that
MDL was in the process of updating its policies and procedures regarding supervisory reviews of

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 14, 2026 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Comments on Findings OLA Assessed as Unresolved
claims and adjudications. MDL estimated that the updates described and implementation of our
recommendation would be completed in April 2026.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 7
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DUI establish procedures to ensure
c. unspent funds remaining on debit cards are returned to DUI or reported to the State
Comptroller as unclaimed property in accordance with the aforementioned Agreement
(repeat).
Status as Determined by MDL - Completed
OLA Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that DUI is still in the process of resolving the returned unspent funds
remaining on debit cards. According to MDL/DUI management, as of February 13. 2026, the
full amount of the bank settlement, referred to as the Letter Agreement in its status report, had
not been reconciled and MDL/DUI has not forwarded any unclaimed property to the
Comptroller's office. We were advised by MDL/DUI management in February 2026 that the
reconciliation will be completed within the next three months.