Title: Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Date: 2026-05-19
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a0cb642a863ce25d48c4fc6
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:07:14.584553
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
May 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 19, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) for the period
beginning October 1, 2021 to October 31, 2025. OCME investigates violent and
suspicious deaths and deaths unattended by a physician. In addition, the OCME
performs autopsies, when necessary, to determine the cause and manner of death.
During fiscal year 2025, OCME investigated 17,316 deaths and performed 5,051
autopsies.
Our audit disclosed that OCME could not document that its use of sole source
procurements was justified and in the State’s best interest. OCME also did not
consolidate certain sole source procurements to maximize the State’s purchasing
power, circumventing certain oversight and transparency requirements.
Our audit also disclosed that OCME did not properly segregate collection and
records issuance duties, and did not have a process to reconcile the autopsy
records issued to the related collections. As a result, records could be issued and
the related collections could be misappropriated without being readily detected.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of OCME, is included as an appendix to
this report. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and,
while MDH generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we
identified certain instances in which statements in the response disagree or appear
to be inconsistent with a report finding and recommendation. In each instance,
we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity

--- Page 4 ---
of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within MDH’s response to
explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of
any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with MDH.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
OCME.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) - Office of the Chief Medical
Examiner (OCME), investigates violent and suspicious deaths and deaths
unattended by a physician. OCME also performs autopsies, when necessary, to
determine the cause and manner of death. According to agency records, OCME
investigated 17,316 deaths and performed 5,051 autopsies in fiscal year 2025.
According to the State’s records, OCME’s fiscal year 2025 expenditures totaled
approximately $23.2 million, of which $16 million related to salaries (see Figure
1). During the period of June 30, 2022 through June 30, 2025, OCME had
vacancy rates that ranged from 15.7 percent to 18.6 percent. As of June 30, 2025,
18.4 percent of the total 114 positions were vacant. These vacancies may have
contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
Figure 1
OCME Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 93
Vacant 21
Total 114
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $15,965,625
Technical and Special Fees 3,547,473
Operating Expenses 3,640,547
Total $23,153,645
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $23,106,163
Reimbursable Fund 47,482
Total $23,153,645
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Office of the Attorney General Audit of Restraint-Related Deaths
In September 2021, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) initiated an audit
of OCME’s death determinations in cases where individuals died during or soon
after being restrained. The audit included an independent evaluation of 87
restraint-related death investigations conducted by OCME between calendar years
2003 and 2019. In the resultant report issued in May 2025, it was noted that the
manner-of-death opinion differed from OCME’s determination for 44 of the
cases, including 36 cases that the case reviewers deemed homicides and OCME
ruled as either undetermined, accidental, or natural.
Prior to the OAG audit, OCME already had procedures requiring independent
reviews of certain causes of deaths (e.g., homicides and undetermined). OCME
updated its procedures in September 2023 to require independent reviews in all
instances where the person died in police custody.
A Governor’s Executive Order effective May 15, 2025 directed the OAG to
determine if the cases included in the audit should be reopened for investigation
and created a task force to recommend improvements for investigating restraint-
related deaths and determine whether additional cases should be reviewed.
Finally, the Executive Order directed MDH to ensure that OCME implemented
recommendations included in the aforementioned OAG audit to improve its
investigations of restraint-related deaths. Reports detailing the task force’s
findings and OCME’s progress in implementing the Executive Order
requirements are due by December 31, 2026.
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement
Finding 1
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) could not document that
its use of sole source procurements was justified and in the State’s best
interest. In addition, OCME did not consolidate certain of these
procurements to leverage the State’s purchasing power, which resulted in the
circumvention of certain oversight and transparency requirements.
Analysis
OCME could not document that its use of sole source procurements was justified
and in the State’s best interest. In addition, OCME did not consolidate certain of
these procurements to leverage the State’s purchasing power, which resulted in
4

--- Page 7 ---
the circumvention of certain oversight and transparency requirements. According
to State records, between October 2021 and October 2025, OCME procured sole
source contracts for goods and services totaling approximately $894,000.
Our test of seven sole source procurements1 totaling $391,000 disclosed that
OCME did not document that no other vendors were available to provide the
particular services or that it attempted to negotiate the related pricing. In this
regard, we noted other vendors that were likely available to provide the services
including vendors under existing statewide contracts. For example, OCME
procured HVAC maintenance totaling approximately $37,300 via sole source
even though these services were available through a Department of General
Services’ statewide master contract. Although OCME advised that it was
required to use this vendor to maintain the related HVAC system warranty, it
could not provide documentation to support this assertion.
OCME also did not consolidate certain of these procurements to maximize the
State’s purchasing power, which resulted in the circumvention of certain
oversight and transparency requirements. Specifically, our review of procurement
activity during the audit period disclosed that OCME awarded 14 sole source
contracts to 3 vendors totaling $508,000, with each contract individually below
$50,000. For example, between June 2022 and June 2025, OCME awarded 1
vendor 5 sole source contracts for neuropathology services totaling $200,000, that
were individually valued between $38,800 and $41,600. OCME management
advised us that it preferred to keep contract awards at or below its Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) delegated purchase level of $50,000, due to the
length of time it takes MDH to procure contracts on its behalf.
State regulations provide that sole source procurements can only be used when no
other source is acceptable or suitable, must be supported with a written
justification approved by the agency head, and that agencies conduct price
negotiations with the vendor. By keeping individual purchases below $50,000,
OCME avoided the direct involvement of MDH’s Office of Contract Management
and Procurement in accordance with the MDH Procurement Policy, and,
depending upon the value, further approval from the Department of General
Services – Office of State Procurement, and the Board of Public Works.
Furthermore, State regulations require publication of the solicitation on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) for procurements exceeding $50,000
to enhance transparency of the procurement process.
1 We selected contracts procured between October 2022 and July 2025 primarily based on
materiality. Services for the seven items tested included HVAC, elevator, medical scanners, and
chiller maintenance, neuropathology and anthropology services, and the lease of refrigerated
storage trailers.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OCME comply with State procurement regulations and
MDH’s Procurement Policy. Specifically, we recommend that OCME
a. ensure that the sole source procurement method is used when only a
single vendor can meet the contract requirements, and adequately
document the sole source justification;
b. ensure that documented price negotiations are conducted, as appropriate;
and
c. consolidate procurements for the same services and obtain required
approvals when total procurement amounts exceed established limits,
including the procurements from the three vendors noted above.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
OCME did not properly segregate collection and records issuance duties and
did not have a process to reconcile the records issued to the related
collections, as required.
Analysis
OCME did not properly segregate collection and records issuance duties and did
not reconcile this activity, as required. State regulations authorize OCME to
collect fees for each type of record (such as autopsy reports) requested by the
public. According to State records, OCME collections between October 2021 and
October 2025 totaled approximately $345,000.
Our review disclosed that four employees handled collections and could also issue
the related records and OCME did not have a process to reconcile the records
issued to the related collections, to ensure that all fees assessed were accounted
for and deposited. As a result, records could be issued and the related collections
misappropriated without being readily detected. Our test of 20 record requests
disclosed that the related fees were properly collected and deposited.2
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual
requires the separation of cash handling and records issuance duties and the
reconciling of the value of records issued to the related collections.
2 Test items were selected from days between September 2022 and September 2025 with
significant collections.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OCME
a. segregate duties to ensure that employees processing collections are
denied the system capability to issue autopsy reports and other records,
and
b. periodically reconcile the value of autopsy reports and other records
issued with the related collections.
We advised OCME how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) for the period
beginning October 1, 2021 and ending October 31, 2025. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OCME’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included OCME’s procedures for investigating certain
deaths, cash receipts, certain procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, certain payroll functions, and materials and supplies.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OCME by MDH’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll functions,
certain procurements and disbursements, maintenance of accounting records, and
related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MDH –
Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 1, 2021 to October 1, 2025, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of OCME’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
We also extracted data from OCME’s internal computer system for the purpose of
testing disbursements. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
OCME’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
8

--- Page 11 ---
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OCME, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OCME’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OCME that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of OCME, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of March 2026 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Managed Care Program, known as
Medical Care Programs
HealthChoice include oversight of the
1 Administration – Managed 01/14/26
nine private Managed Care
Care Program
Organizations
Behavioral Health
Administration and Medical  Behavioral Health Administration
Care Programs Administration  Medical Care Programs Administration
2 10/03/25
- Administrative Service Administrative Service Organization for
Organization for Behavioral Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institute for Children
Children and Adolescents
3 and 08/25/25
 Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents
Adolescents – Baltimore
Developmental Disabilities
4 Developmental Disabilities Administration 06/18/25
Administration
 22 Health Professional Boards and
5 Regulatory Services Commissions 04/09/25
 The Office of Health Care Quality
6 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 03/19/25
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
Prevention and Health
 Office of Population Health
Promotion Administration -
Improvement
Office of
 Office of Preparedness and Response
Population Health
7  Office of Provider Engagement and 08/09/24
Improvement -
Regulation – Office of Controlled
Office of Preparedness and
Substances Administration
Response - Office of Provider
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Engagement and Regulation
Regulation – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
8 Pharmacy Services Pharmacy Services 08/09/24
9 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
10

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of March 2026 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center
State Psychiatric Hospital
10  Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
Centers
 Springfield Hospital Center
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review
Health Regulatory
11 Commission 01/25/24
Commissions
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
Medical Care Programs
12  Medical Care Programs Administration 11/02/23
Administration
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive
Director for Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and
13 Disabilities 10/19/23
Other Units
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
14 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities  Potomac Center
15 10/24/22
Residential Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
May 14, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of
Health – Office of the Chief Medical Examiner for the period beginning October 1, 2021, to
October 31, 2025.
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) appreciates the opportunity to respond to the
audit findings and values accountability, continuous improvement, and responsible stewardship
of State resources while fulfilling its critical public health and safety mission.
As outlined in the responses that follow, the OCME acknowledges opportunities to strengthen
administrative documentation, procurement processes, and certain internal controls. At the same
time, it is important to emphasize the unique context in which these findings originated. OCME’s
successful operations depend on highly specialized services, tools, and personnel that can
provide forensic analysis and uninterrupted support of statewide medicological death
investigations while preserving accreditation standards—oftentimes working under intense time
pressure to do so.
OCME, in collaboration with the Office of State Procurement and the Maryland Department of
Health, has already implemented process improvements to address three finding
recommendations and initiated corrective action for each remaining recommendation to be
addressed by the end of the year. The agency will continue to implement and test sustainable
improvements while also ensuring continuous delivery of forensic medicine and death care
services to the State of Maryland.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Meena Seshamani, M.D., Ph.D.
Secretary

--- Page 15 ---
Enclosures
cc: Kate Wolff, MPA, Chief of Staff, MDH
Emily Berg, Deputy Chief of Staff, MDH
Meg Sullivan, Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services
Martine Gordan, Chief of Staff, MDH
David Davis, Director of Operations
Clint Hackett, Deputy Secretary for Operations, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, Internal Controls, Audit
Compliance & Information Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
2

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Agency Response Form
Procurement
Finding 1
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) could not document that
its use of sole source procurements was justified and in the State’s best
interest. In addition, OCME did not consolidate certain of these
procurements to leverage the State’s purchasing power, which resulted in the
circumvention of certain oversight and transparency requirements.
We recommend that OCME comply with State procurement regulations and
MDH’s Procurement Policy. Specifically, we recommend that OCME
a. ensure that the sole source procurement method is used when only a
single vendor can meet the contract requirements, and adequately
document the sole source justification;
b. ensure that documented price negotiations are conducted, as appropriate;
and
c. consolidate procurements for the same services and obtain required
approvals when total procurement amounts exceed established limits,
including the procurements from the three vendors noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Partially Accurate
Please provide OCME recognizes the importance of clear and consistent procurement
additional comments as documentation and has already implemented targeted process
deemed necessary. improvements intended to strengthen administrative consistency while
preserving operational responsiveness and providing uninterrupted
medicolegal death investigation services to the State of Maryland.
Specifically, sole source justification documentation will be
strengthened moving forward.
While OCME agrees that documentation practices can be improved and
will be strengthened going forward, OCME disagrees with the claim that
its sole source contracting activity deliberately circumvented state
procurement requirements. OCME maintains that these procurements
were both justified and necessary to ensure uninterrupted, time-sensitive
medicolegal death investigation services and systems for the state that
are critical to OCME’s statutory mission. These procurements were
driven by operational urgency, limited vendor availability, specialized
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Agency Response Form
system compatibility requirements, and the need to maintain
accreditation standards.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of OCME has implemented procedures to ensure that sole source
corrective action or procurements are used only when appropriate and that written
explain disagreement. justifications are consistently documented. Specifically, OCME will
continue going forward to:
● Document source justification using a template developed by the
MDH Office of Contract Management and Procurement (OCMP).
● Require supervisory review and approval of all sole source
documentation prior to procurement execution.
● Coordinate with OCMP to confirm appropriate procurement
pathways for specialized forensic services.
Additionally, training on the revised documentation procedures will be
provided to OCME administrative and procurement staff.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of OCME has ensured that documented price negotiations are conducted
corrective action or where appropriate. OCME will continue to:
explain disagreement.
● Establish written guidance requiring documentation of price
negotiations or pricing analysis for sole source procurements
when applicable.
● Maintain documentation of vendor price discussions, cost
comparisons, or other reasonable pricing assessments in the
procurement file.
● Work with MDH procurement staff to ensure that pricing
documentation standards meet State procurement requirements.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of OCME has reviewed procurements for opportunities to consolidate
corrective action or services when operationally appropriate and will seek required approvals
explain disagreement. when procurement thresholds are exceeded.
OCME will continue to work with MDH OCMP and State procurement
authorities to:
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Agency Response Form
● Evaluate whether certain recurring specialized services can be
structured under master contracts or other procurement vehicles;
● Establish procurement planning processes to identify services
that may reasonably be consolidated; and
● Ensure that required approvals are obtained when procurement
thresholds are exceeded.
Auditor’s Comment: While OCME agrees with our recommendations, it notes
that our analysis is factually inaccurate because it did not deliberately circumvent
state procurement requirements and because the procurements referenced were
justified and necessary. Our analysis did not state that OCME deliberately
circumvented State procurement requirements. Rather, the finding indicates that
OCME’s practice of not consolidating the procurements resulted in the
circumvention of the requirements. That said, as further noted in our analysis, we
were advised by OCME management that the practice of keeping contract awards
at or below its delegated procurement threshold was done to expedite the process.
As a result, we continue to believe that our analysis is factually accurate.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
OCME did not properly segregate collection and records issuance duties and
did not have a process to reconcile the records issued to the related
collections, as required.
We recommend that OCME
a. segregate duties to ensure that employees processing collections are
denied the system capability to issue autopsy reports and other records,
and
b. periodically reconcile the value of autopsy reports and other records
issued with the related collections.
We advised OCME how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide At present, the OCME Records Department is operating under staffing
additional comments as constraints, most recently due to the retirement of a key staff member in
deemed necessary. March 2025, followed by the retirement of the records department
supervisor in February 2026, and the ongoing State hiring freeze
affecting non-exempt positions. Following the loss of experienced
personnel, remaining staff have been required to assume cross-coverage
of duties to ensure continuity of critical operations and maintain timely
service delivery.
OCME has taken a risk-based operational approach by implementing
compensating controls designed to maintain accountability while
preserving continuity of operations. These measures include supervisory
review of transactions and record releases, electronic logging and
tracking of requests and payments, periodic reconciliation processes
between records issued and fees collected, and ongoing monitoring of
system access and user activity. Importantly, the audit did not identify
any missing or misappropriated funds, confirming that all tested
collections were properly deposited, in accordance with both the
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Agency Response Form
National Association of Medical Examiners’ Inspection and
Accreditation checklist and COMAR 10.35 Subtitle 14.
OCME is actively working with the Maryland Department of Health to
restore staffing levels and fill vacant positions within the Records
Department. Recruitment for these positions has proven challenging due
to the specialized nature of the work, the need for employees capable of
handling sensitive medicolegal information, extensive training
requirements, and broader statewide hiring and retention difficulties
affecting administrative support positions.
Due to the implications of an internal promotion, once the records
supervisor position is filled (request to appoint submitted May 6, 2026
with anticipated start date of June 10, 2026), the process may begin to
request a freeze exemption for the remaining open clerk position,
followed by recruitment, hiring, and training of a qualified individual.
As staffing stabilizes and operational capacity improves, OCME
anticipates transitioning toward a more traditional segregation of duties
structure consistent with the audit recommendation and similar to what
was in place prior to March 2025.
As noted above, OCME has already implemented compensating
controls, including supervisory review, electronic system tracking, and
the development of formal reconciliation procedures to further mitigate
risk in the interim.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 1, 2027
Please provide details of OCME will modify internal procedures and system permissions to
corrective action or ensure that employees responsible for processing fee collections are not
explain disagreement. able to issue autopsy reports or other records within the records
management system.
Specifically, OCME will:
● Realign duties to ensure separation between fee collection and
records issuance functions.
● Reevaluate current workflows and system access to address
this issue and implement appropriate changes moving forward.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Agency Response Form
● Conduct periodic audit reviews of case file access within the
database system to monitor for suspicious activity and ensure
appropriate use.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 1, 2027
Please provide details of OCME will establish periodic reconciliation procedures to compare the
corrective action or value of records issued with related collections.
explain disagreement.
The reconciliation process will include:
● Monthly reconciliation of records issued to fees collected
● Documentation of reconciliation reviews by supervisory staff; and
● Coordination with MDH financial management personnel to ensure
reconciliation procedures align with State accounting policies.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Dianne P. Ramirez
Senior Auditor
Karen J. Howes
Zain Khalid
Staff Auditors