Title: Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration
Date: 2026-05-20
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a15e95a4b5505d1d6c1d5d2
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:07:05.626059
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
May 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 20, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) for the period
beginning April 1, 2022 to March 31, 2025. MCPA administers the Medical
Assistance Program (Medicaid), which provides health care benefits to eligible
Maryland residents. This audit includes MCPA’s primary functions such as
monitoring of recipient and provider eligibility, the Medicaid Management
Information System (MMIS II) security and controls, third party insurance
recoveries, and payments for Medicaid recipients in hospitals, nursing facilities,
in-home and community-based settings, and dental services. This activity
accounted for approximately $5.4 billion of the $16.7 billion in MCPA
expenditures for fiscal year 2025.
Our audit disclosed that MCPA did not ensure that issues identified with
Medicaid eligibility determinations were corrected and that annual eligibility
determinations were completed timely, potentially resulting in payments on behalf
of ineligible individuals. For example, MCPA paid $2.3 million for 152
recipients who did not have required support of income and citizenship eligibility
or were ineligible based on the documentation provided. In addition, MCPA did
not ensure that Medicaid recipients age 65 or older had applied for Medicare,
potentially resulting in the State paying for services that should have been covered
by the federal government.
Our audit also disclosed that MCPA did not have effective processes to identify,
prevent, and recover questionable Medicaid payments including $9.2 million in

--- Page 4 ---
payments on behalf of recipients who were incarcerated or deceased at the time of
service. In addition, MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient eligibility
information were processed timely and accurately. MCPA also did not ensure
that referrals of potential third-party health insurance information were
investigated and recorded in MMIS II, which could result in MCPA improperly
paying claims that should have been paid by a third-party. Similar conditions
were noted in one or more prior audit reports but were not corrected.
Our audit further disclosed that MCPA did not ensure that continued stay reviews
(CSRs) were conducted to verify that recipients in nursing facilities required the
level of care provided and ultimately billed to Medicaid, a condition noted in our
two preceding audit reports dating back to November 2019 but not sufficiently
corrected. Specifically, we noted that CSRs were not completed for 4,425
recipients during calendar year 2024, resulting in a lack of assurance that the
associated payments totaling $338.3 million were proper.
Our audit also included our review of an allegation received on our fraud, waste
and abuse hotline which disclosed that MCPA did not approve home and
community-based plans of service timely, resulting in numerous recipients not
receiving required services and payments for services that were no longer
medically necessary. For example, our review of 20 recipients’ plans of service
disclosed that the untimely approval resulted in 5 recipients not receiving critical
services such as environmental adaptations and payments totaling $430,000 for
services provided to 12 recipients that were not medically necessary.
Our audit also disclosed that MCPA did not ensure that all Community First
Choice (CFC) program recipients received nurse monitoring visits to verify that
they received personal assistance services in accordance with their service plans,
including 365 recipients who were between 1 and 4.6 years overdue for a visit.
MCPA also did not audit Medical Day Care and Supports Planning providers in
accordance with its policy. Similar conditions were commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports dating back to November 2019 but were not sufficiently
corrected.
In addition, our audit disclosed that MCPA did not ensure that vendor employees
with access to PII and PHI obtained criminal background checks as required by
the contracts. Finally, MCPA did not have procedures to reconcile Medicaid
expenditures recorded in MMIS II with the State’s accounting records. As a
result, MCPA did not detect that fiscal year 2023 and 2024 expenditures totaling
$200.9 million were not recorded in MMIS II.
2

--- Page 5 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
In our preceding audit report, dated November 2, 2023, we reported that MCPA’s
accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory in accordance with the
rating system we established in conformity with State law. Based on the results
of our current audit, we have concluded that MCPA’s accountability and
compliance level remains unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the significance of our audit findings and the number of
repeat findings.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of MCPA, is included as Appendix B to
this report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MDH’s
response related to the cybersecurity audit finding. In accordance with State law,
we have reviewed the response and, while MDH generally agrees with the
recommendations in this report, we identified certain instances in which
statements in the response disagree or appear to be inconsistent with a report
finding and recommendation. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our
audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding.
In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included general “auditor’s comments” in Appendix A and within MDH’s
response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with MDH.
3

--- Page 6 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MCPA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope 8
Unfunded Liabilities to the Federal Government 11
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 12
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 12
Findings and Recommendations 15
Recipient Eligibility
Finding 1 – The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not 15
ensure that issues identified with Medicaid eligibility determinations
were corrected and that the Department of Human Services and the
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange conducted timely eligibility
redeterminations, potentially resulting in payments on behalf of
ineligible individuals.
Finding 2 – MCPA did not ensure that recipients age 65 or older applied 16
for Medicare, as required by State regulations.
* Finding 3 – MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, 17
and recover questionable Medicaid payments including $9.2 million
in payments on behalf of recipients who were incarcerated or
deceased at the time of service.
* Finding 4 – MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid 19
eligibility information were processed timely and accurately.
Third-Party Liability
* Finding 5 – MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential third-party 20
health insurance information were investigated and recorded in the
Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II), which could
result in MCPA improperly paying claims that should have been
paid by a third party.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Program Oversight
* Finding 6 – MCPA did not ensure that the utilization control agent 23
contractor performed continued stay reviews of Medicaid recipients
in nursing facilities.
Finding 7 – MCPA did not approve home and community-based 24
services plans of service timely, resulting in numerous recipients not
receiving required services and payments for services that were no
longer medically necessary.
* Finding 8 – MCPA did not establish adequate oversight to ensure that 25
all Community First Choice program recipients received personal
assistance services in accordance with their plans of service.
* Finding 9 – MCPA did not conduct the required audits of Medical Day 26
Care and Supports Planning providers in accordance with its policy.
Information System Security and Control
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 28
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 11 – MCPA did not ensure that vendor employees obtained 28
criminal background checks as required by the contracts.
Reconciliation of MMIS II to State Accounting Records
Finding 12 – MCPA did not have procedures to reconcile Medicaid 29
expenditures recorded in MMIS II with the State’s accounting
records and could not readily explain $200.9 million in expenditures
that were not recorded in MMIS II.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 30
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 34
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of
April 2026
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Auditor’s Comments Appendix A
Agency Response Appendix B
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA) administers Medicaid, a joint federal and state
entitlement program for low-income individuals (recipients). The program is
administered by the states, which are required to provide healthcare coverage to
all applicants who meet the program’s eligibility criteria. In its capacity as
Maryland’s administering agency, MCPA is responsible for enrolling healthcare
providers (such as physicians), establishing program regulations, setting provider
payment rates, reviewing and paying provider claims, and obtaining federal
reimbursement for eligible costs. MDH has agreements with the Department of
Human Services (DHS) and the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
delegating its responsibility to them for Medicaid recipient eligibility
determinations.
According to State records, MCPA’s fiscal year 2025 expenditures totaled
approximately $16.7 billion, including $10 billion that was federally funded (see
Figure 1). During the period of June 30, 2022 through June 30, 2025, MCPA had
vacancy rates that ranged from 13.0 percent to 15.3 percent. As of June 30, 2025,
approximately 15.3 percent of the total 678 positions were vacant. These
vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
MCPA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 574
Vacant 104
Total 678
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $ 78,445,266
Technical and Special Fees 4,976,563
Operating Expenses 16,641,281,640
Total $ 16,724,703,469
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 5,687,257,302
Special Fund 822,782,161
Federal Fund 10,059,499,536
Reimbursable Fund 155,164,470
Total $ 16,724,703,469
Source: State financial and personal records
The vast majority of these expenditures related to services provided to the 1.5
million Maryland Medicaid recipients as of June 30, 2025 (see Figure 2). During
the audit period there was a decrease in Medicaid recipients, due primarily to the
end of the COVID-era continuous enrollment policy and resumption of normal
eligibility redeterminations, which resulted in many recipients being disenrolled
because they no longer met eligibility requirements.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 2
MCPA Medicaid Expenditures and Recipients
(Fiscal Years 2018 to 2025)
1,725,000
1,404,000 1,508,000
$16.7
$14.1
$10.9
2018 2022 2025
Recipients Expenditures
Source: State accounting records, MCPA records
The scope of this audit included MCPA’s primary administrative functions.
These functions accounted for $5.4 billion in fiscal year 2024 expenditures
including $4.5 billion processed in MCPA’s Medicaid Management Information
System (MMIS II) (see Figure 3) and $920.3 million processed outside of MMIS
II. In addition, we reviewed procedures and controls over activities that would
impact all MCPA expenditures including MCPA’s monitoring of MMIS II
security and controls, recipient and provider eligibility, and third-party insurance
recoveries.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 3
Fiscal Year 2024 Medicaid Expenditures
Processed via MMIS II by Service Type
($ in millions)
Hospital
Services
Home and
$858
Community
19%
Based Services
$1,006
22%
Dental
$382
9%
Nursing
Facilities Medicare
$1,499 $283
34% Other 6%
$451
10%
Source: MMIS II
We conduct several other audits that cover other Medicaid activities including
MCPA’s Managed Care Program, MCPA’s monitoring of the Behavioral Health
Administration’s Administrative Service Organization, MCPA’s Pharmacy
Services, and MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units [see Exhibit 1].
Unfunded Liabilities to the Federal Government
In our December 18, 2025 special report on Statewide Review of Budget Closeout
Transactions for Fiscal Year 2025, we noted that MDH reported unfunded federal
liabilities at the end of fiscal year 2025 totaling approximately $52 million1 for
which State general funds may be needed. Specifically, MDH reported a $27.3
million liability related to enhanced rates paid during fiscal year 2025 to
Maryland Medicaid nursing facilities that were not approved by the federal
1 The Closeout report identified total potential liabilities to the federal government of
approximately $280.9 million as of June 30, 2025, which also included $228.9 million in
unprovided for payables for expenditures that exceeded the appropriation plus disallowed federal
fund claims related to MDH’s Developmental Disabilities Administration.
11

--- Page 14 ---
government. In July 2025, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
notified MDH that it would need to return federal funds obtained based on the
unapproved rates. MDH determined that the disallowance totaled $89.7 million,
which exceeded the available remaining general fund appropriation in fiscal year
2025 by $27.3 million.
MDH also reported a potential $24.7 million liability related to enhanced funding
received under MCPA’s Money Follows the Person (MFP) program. The State
obtained federal funds covering 75 percent of its MFP expenditures instead of the
more traditional 50 percent federal funding arrangement used in many other
federal assistance programs. The additional 25 percent in enhanced federal
reimbursements is required to be spent on additional MFP program expenditures.
As noted in our last five Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions
reports dating back to fiscal year 2021, MDH has continuously not spent the
enhanced funding on qualified MFP program expenditures resulting in a potential
liability. MDH has until September 30, 2027 to spend these savings on MFP
program expenditures or the funds will need to be returned to the federal
government.2
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline that recipients were
not approved for home and community-based services timely, resulting in
significant delays in recipients receiving services. Based on our review, we were
able to substantiate the allegation and identified certain deficiencies that require
action by MCPA as further described in Finding 7. Our review did not identify
any matters that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s
Criminal Division.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 10 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 2, 2023. See Figure 4 for the results
of our review.
In our preceding audit report, we reported that MCPA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. Based on the results of our current
audit, we have concluded that MCPA’s accountability and compliance level
2 The date to spend these savings was extended from September 2025 to September 2027 based on
the federal Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023.
12

--- Page 15 ---
remains unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the current
unsatisfactory rating were the significance of audit findings and the number of
repeated findings.
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential third-
party health insurance information were investigated and
Repeated
Finding 1 recorded in the Medicaid Management Information System
(Current Finding 5)
(MMIS II), which could result in MCPA improperly paying
claims that should have been paid by a third party.
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent,
and recover questionable Medicaid payments, including Repeated
Finding 2
$7.1 million in payments on behalf of incarcerated and (Current Finding 3)
deceased recipients.
MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid
Repeated
Finding 3 eligibility information were processed timely and
(Current Finding 4)
accurately.
MCPA had not established adequate oversight to ensure
that all Community First Choice (CFC) program recipients Repeated
Finding 4
received personal assistance services in accordance with (Current Finding 8)
their plans of services.
MCPA did not monitor the utilization control agent
contractor to ensure continued stay reviews of Medicaid Repeated
Finding 5
recipients receiving services from nursing facilities were (Current Finding 6)
performed timely.
MCPA did not have an established process to ensure costly
Finding 6 recipient ventilator care claims submitted by nursing Not Repeated
facilities were valid, as required by State regulations.
MCPA did not conduct the required audits of Medical Day
Care (MDC) and Supports Planning providers, and the Repeated
Finding 7
related audit policy and procedures were not sufficiently (Current Finding 9)
comprehensive.
MCPA did not adequately monitor the hospital claims audit
Finding 8 contractor and had not collected or recovered improper Not Repeated
claims identified by the contractor totaling $6.9 million.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 9 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
Finding 10 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
3 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
have been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Recipient Eligibility
Background
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) has agreements with both
the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and the Department of Human
Services (DHS) delegating responsibility for Medicaid eligibility determinations
and redeterminations. MHBE is responsible for processing income-based
determinations via the Maryland Health Connection (MHC) and DHS is
responsible for processing non-income based determinations (such as, for
applicants applying for other DHS benefits such as disability or Temporary Cash
Assistance) via its web-based Eligibility and Enrollment (E&E) System.
Applications that are rejected or flagged by MHBE are forwarded to DHS or
MDH for additional processing and review. According to MCPA records,
approximately 1.5 million individuals were enrolled in Medicaid as of June 30,
2025.
MCPA has several automated and manual processes to monitor MHBE and DHS
eligibility determinations to identify questionable Medicaid activity including
recipients who are incarcerated, deceased, missing social security numbers, or are
receiving benefits in another state. Instances of questionable recipient eligibility
information or activity are to be investigated and resolved by DHS or the Local
Health Departments (LHDs) upon referral from MCPA, or in-house by MCPA
employees. MCPA is responsible for overseeing the resultant investigative efforts
to ensure the proper corrective actions were taken, such as removing eligibility for
continued participation in Maryland’s Medicaid program or recovering
erroneously paid benefits.
Finding 1
MCPA did not ensure that issues identified with Medicaid eligibility
determinations were corrected and that DHS and MHBE conducted timely
eligibility redeterminations, potentially resulting in payments on behalf of
ineligible individuals.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that issues identified with Medicaid eligibility
determinations were corrected and that DHS and MHBE conducted timely
eligibility redeterminations, potentially resulting in payments on behalf of
ineligible individuals.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 MCPA did not ensure that DHS and the LHDs corrected issues identified
during its quarterly review of initial eligibility determinations. Specifically,
MCPA notified DHS and the LHDs of the issues identified but did not follow
up to ensure they were corrected. Our analysis of 4 MCPA quarterly
eligibility reviews during calendar years 2023 and 2024 disclosed that 306 of
the 993 issues identified by MCPA were still not resolved as of May 2025. As
a result, MCPA potentially paid for services provided to individuals who were
ineligible for Medicaid. For example, MCPA paid approximately $2.3 million
in calendar year 2024 for 152 recipients for whom the review disclosed did
not have required support of income and citizenship eligibility or were
ineligible based on the documentation provided.
 MCPA did not ensure that MHBE and DHS conducted annual eligibility
redeterminations for all recipients as required by federal regulations. In
response to our inquiries, MCPA obtained a report from the DHS E&E system
as of October 2025 which identified 1,950 recipients that had not received an
annual eligibility redetermination between December 2023 and September
2025. MCPA paid claims totaling approximately $7.1 million for 546 of these
recipients after their respective redetermination due date. While MCPA
advised that MHBE’s MHC system would automatically disenroll recipients if
a redetermination was not performed, it could not provide a similar report
from MHBE to support this assertion.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. issues identified with initial eligibility determinations, including those
noted above, are timely resolved by DHS and the LHDs; and
b. DHS and MHBE conduct required annual redeterminations and take
appropriate action when redeterminations are not completed, including
those noted above.
Finding 2
MCPA did not ensure that recipients age 65 or older applied for Medicare, as
required by State regulations.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure Medicaid recipients age 65 or older had applied for
Medicare. State regulations require Medicaid applicants age 65 years or older to
furnish proof that they have applied for or are receiving Medicare. While
applicants who enroll in Medicaid through MHBE are automatically disenrolled
once they turn 65, applicants who enroll through DHS need to be manually
16

--- Page 19 ---
reviewed. MCPA management advised that it discontinued a process to ensure
that manual reviews were performed by DHS to focus on other priorities during
our audit period.
According to MCPA records, during calendar year 2024, MCPA paid claims
totaling approximately $145 million for 4,873 recipients who were not enrolled in
Medicare despite being potentially eligible based on their coverage group and age.
Our test of 10 of these recipients with claims totaling approximately $1.9 million4
disclosed that MCPA could not readily determine whether 6 recipients had
applied for Medicare. According to MCPA records, calendar year 2024 Medicaid
claims for these 6 recipients totaled approximately $1.3 million.
Timely enrollment in Medicare is significant because Medicare is federally
funded while Medicaid costs are partially paid with State funds. Furthermore,
providers must submit claims for Medicare reimbursement before submitting the
claims for Medicaid reimbursement, which generally covers the Medicare
coinsurance (normally 20 percent) and deductibles. Consequently, the amounts
paid on fee-for-service claims by Medicaid for recipients who are dually eligible
for Medicare and Medicaid are generally less than the amounts paid for recipients
who only have Medicaid.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA ensure recipients age 65 or older have applied
for Medicare, as required by State regulations.
Finding 3
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover
questionable Medicaid payments including $9.2 million in payments on
behalf of recipients who were incarcerated or deceased at the time of service.
Analysis
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover
questionable Medicaid payments on behalf of incarcerated or deceased recipients.
Fee-for-Service Payments for Incarcerated Recipients
MCPA did not have an effective process to identify, prevent, and recover fee-for-
service payments on behalf of incarcerated recipients. Under federal and State
4 We selected 10 recipients over the age of 65 and who were included in a coverage group
receiving supplemental security income or were medically-needy, with the most material claims
during calendar year 2024.
17

--- Page 20 ---
regulations, Medicaid only covers certain fee-for-service claims (primarily
inpatient hospital care) while a recipient is incarcerated.5
Our Data Analytics Unit independently obtained incarceration records6 from the
Maryland Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) and
matched this data to Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II)
claims paid between May 2022 and January 2025. The review identified $6.4
million in payments for 2,397 recipients who were incarcerated at the time of
service including 1,042 incarcerated individuals that were also identified during
our prior audit. Although MCPA performed weekly matches to DPSCS
incarceration data, the matches did not identify 908 of the aforementioned 2,397
recipients for whom MCPA paid $1.7 million. In addition, MCPA did not correct
1,489 recipients identified by its matches for whom MCPA paid $4.7 million.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report and in our
June 23, 2020 performance audit report of MDH’s Efforts to Identify and Analyze
Improper Medicaid Payments. MDH’s response to our prior report, on behalf of
MCPA, indicated that it would establish a process to identify, prevent, and
recover improper payments on behalf of incarcerated recipients by March 2024.
MCPA could not readily explain why these recipients were not identified and/or
investigated to prevent future payments.
Payments on Behalf of Deceased Recipients
MCPA did not ensure certain recipients reported as deceased were investigated
and removed from Medicaid in a timely manner. MCPA performed a monthly
match of Medicaid recipient records to the federal Social Security Administration
and MDH Vital Statistics Administration (VSA) death records. Recipient records
that are exact matches to death records are automatically disenrolled. MCPA
forwarded the remaining match results to DHS and the LHDs to investigate the
matches and disenroll any deceased recipients from Medicaid within 30 days in
accordance with MDH’s standard operating procedures. Our review of MCPA
records disclosed that 7,851 (56 percent) of the 14,146 recipients reported as
deceased between April 2024 and March 2025 had not been investigated as of
April 2025, including 4,006 recipients reported as deceased over six months
earlier. MCPA advised that it was aware that these cases were not resolved
within the required timeframe but did not track the status of these cases and could
not document any follow-up with DHS and the LHDs.
5 These individuals’ healthcare costs are generally paid by DPSCS.
6 The data we obtained from DPSCS covered the period between July 2017 and March 2025 and
included the periods of incarceration based on dates of inmate intake, transfer, and release.
18

--- Page 21 ---
MCPA also did not identify and investigate payments with a date of service after
the recipient’s date of death. We performed a match between MMIS II claims
with service dates between May 2022 and December 2024 and the VSA death
records as of May 2025. Our match identified 18,086 claims totaling $2.8 million
(associated with 4,510 recipients) for services after the recipient’s reported date of
death. At our request, MCPA investigated 35 of these recipients7 and determined
that 30 recipients with claims totaling $458,000 were deceased prior to the
medical service represented by the claims. As of December 2025, MCPA advised
that it had recovered $178,000 of these claims.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to November 2019. MDH’s response to the prior report, on behalf of
MCPA, indicated that it had already taken action to identify and remove deceased
recipients from Medicaid and pursue recovery of improper payments made after
the recipients’ dates of death. However, as noted above, MCPA did not ensure
recipients reported as deceased were investigated and removed from Medicaid in
a timely manner and did not have a process to identify and investigate payments
for services after the date of death.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA establish effective processes over questionable
Medicaid payments. Specifically, MCPA should establish processes to
a. identify, prevent, and recover improper fee-for-service payments related
to incarcerated recipients (repeat); and
b. ensure deceased recipients are removed from Medicaid in a timely
manner and investigate and pursue the recovery of improper payments
after the recipients’ dates of death, including those noted in our analysis
(repeat).
Finding 4
MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid eligibility
information were processed timely and accurately.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid eligibility information
were processed timely and accurately. MCPA is notified via automated reporting
processes when recipient information in MMIS II differs from information on
DHS’ and MHBE’s recipient systems, and MCPA staff manually update MMIS II
with the correct information based on its investigation. Our review disclosed that
7 We selected recipients with material claims after their date of death.
19

--- Page 22 ---
MCPA did not follow up on these notifications timely and according to MCPA
records, there were approximately 157,000 notifications outstanding as of April
2025, including 41,000 outstanding from 1 to 3.6 years.
MCPA also did not ensure that errors identified during supervisory reviews of
eligibility changes were subsequently corrected. MCPA’s supervisory review of
approximately 9,000 changes made to eligibility information between August
2022 and March 2025 identified 1,000 changes that required correction because
they did not agree to the supporting documentation. Our test of 50 of these
changes disclosed that 8 changes identified between June 2023 and March 2025
were still not corrected in MMIS II as of July 2025.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report, in which
we noted that 93,000 notifications were outstanding as of February 2023. MDH’s
response to that report, on behalf of MCPA, indicated that MCPA would ensure
recipient eligibility information in MMIS II is updated timely and errors to
recipients’ eligibility are corrected by December 2023. While MCPA took certain
actions to address the notification backlog including temporarily reassigning staff
to process notifications, these actions ultimately did not result in notifications
being processed timely. In addition, as noted above, the errors in changes to
recipient eligibility information were not always subsequently corrected. MCPA
attributed the backlog to inadequate staffing and the increase in notifications
received after the COVID-19 public health emergency.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA ensure recipient eligibility information is
updated timely and accurately, and that errors to recipient eligibility
information in MMIS II are corrected (repeat).
Third-Party Liability
Finding 5
MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential third-party health
insurance information were investigated and recorded in MMIS II, which
could result in MCPA improperly paying claims that should have been paid
by a third-party.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of third-party health insurance information
were investigated and recorded into MMIS II. MCPA receives referrals of other
potentially liable parties from several sources including its third-party liability
20

--- Page 23 ---
vendor, MCOs, DHS, and MHBE. Federal and State regulations provide that
Medicaid shall be the payer of last resort and that it shall only be used to pay costs
not covered by others, such as third-party insurers. Federal regulations further
require MCPA to follow up on the potential third-party insurance information
within 60 days of notification. We reviewed MCPA’s procedures for processing
referrals received from the third-party liability vendor and the MCOs, which
accounted for 216,000 and 232,000, respectively of the 526,000 referrals received
in calendar year 2024.
 MCPA did not verify that all third-party insurance identified by the third-party
liability vendor was automatically interfaced into MMIS II as intended. Our
review disclosed that, as of December 2025, approximately 292,000 (74
percent) of the 396,000 referrals submitted between April 2024 and March
2025 were not recorded in MMIS II. For example, insurance information
provided by the vendor in May 2024 for 11,297 recipients was not interfaced
into MMIS II. MCPA advised there were multiple reasons why the
information would not be interfaced, such as duplicate or incomplete referrals
but could not document that it investigated these referrals to determine why
they did not interface.
Since the insurance information was not recorded in MMIS II, the claims
would not be subject to any review to determine if some or all of the claims
should have been paid by others. In this regard, our analysis8 of claims for the
aforementioned 11,297 recipients, with dates of service between June 2024
and February 2025, identified 38,765 claims totaling $14.6 million for 2,231
recipients that were paid entirely by MCPA. In response to our request,
MCPA investigated 10 of these claims9 totaling approximately $206,000 and
determined that 5 claims totaling $104,000 should have been paid by the
recipient’s third-party insurance and needed to be recovered.
 MCPA did not investigate all MCO referrals of possible third-party insurance.
Specifically, according to MCPA records, approximately 166,000 of the
325,000 referrals from MCOs between January 2024 and May 2025, had not
been investigated as of August 2025, including 116,000 that were outstanding
for at least six months. MCPA management attributed the backlog to the
manual process used for MCO referrals that were more time-intensive to
investigate. Although MCPA advised that it was working to automate the
8 Our analysis was based on recipients with open insurance spans and excluded recipients who
only had vision and/or dental insurance coverage.
9 We selected recipients with material claims between June and December 2024.
21

--- Page 24 ---
MCO referral process, this process has not been implemented as of November
2025.
A similar condition related to third-party insurance coverage was commented
upon in our preceding audit report and similar conditions related to MCO referrals
have been commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to
November 2019. MDH’s response to the prior report, on behalf of MCPA,
indicated that MCPA would ensure that referrals received from the third-party
liability vendor were interfaced into MMIS II by the beginning of calendar year
2024 and that it had already taken action to ensure MCO referrals were
investigated timely. However, as noted above, MCPA did not ensure that all
referrals received from its vendor were recorded in MMIS II and did not
investigate all MCO referrals.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. all third-party health insurance information provided by its third-party
liability vendor are interfaced with MMIS II (repeat), and
b. all MCO insurance referrals are recorded into MMIS II timely (repeat).
Program Oversight
Background
MCPA is responsible for ensuring that Maryland Medicaid recipients receive high
quality services and for verifying the propriety of the related provider payments.
Based on our assessment of significance and risk we reviewed MCPA’s oversight
of nursing, hospital, dental, and home and community-based services (HCBS)
which include the Community First Choice (CFC) and Medical Day Care (MDC)
programs.10 We also reviewed MCPA’s oversight of the utilization control agent
(UCA) contractor, the hospital claims audit contractor, and the dental
administrative service organization which assist MCPA in the administration and
monitoring of these programs.
10 The CFC program provides services to eligible recipients that are intended to enable them to
remain at home and the MDC program provides eligible recipients the opportunity to receive
medical care during the day in a community-based setting.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 6
MCPA did not ensure that the UCA contractor performed continued stay
reviews (CSRs) of Medicaid recipients in nursing facilities.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that its UCA contractor performed CSRs of Medicaid
recipients in nursing facilities. The CSRs help verify that recipients required the
level of care provided and ultimately billed to Medicaid by nursing facilities. The
contract required the UCA contractor to perform quarterly CSRs of recipients
during their first year in a nursing facility and annually thereafter. According to
State records, MCPA paid the UCA contractor approximately $1.3 million to
perform CSRs during calendar year 2024.
Our review disclosed that MCPA did not track the CSRs performed for each
recipient to ensure the UCA contractor completed all required reviews. Our
analysis of 14,609 Medicaid recipients11 residing in nursing facilities during
calendar year 2024 disclosed that 4,425 recipients (30 percent) had not received a
CSR during the year as required. As a result, MCPA lacked assurance that these
recipients required the level of care provided and that the related payments, which
totaled $338.3 million during calendar year 2024, were proper.
Since MCPA did not monitor the UCA contractor for timely completion, it was
not aware of the missing CSRs and therefore could not properly determine
whether to assess liquidated damages against the UCA contractor, even though
the contract provided that MCPA could assess $75 for each CSR that was not
completed. In this regard, MCPA could have assessed liquidated damages
totaling approximately $332,000 for the aforementioned 4,425 uncompleted
CSRs.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to November 2019. MDH’s response to our preceding report, on
behalf of MCPA, indicated that it would monitor the UCA contractor’s
completion of CSRs and assess liquidated damages if performance was below the
contractual standards. However, as noted above, MCPA was still not tracking the
completion of CSRs and did not assess liquidated damages provided for in the
contract.
11 Our analysis focused on recipients with a first date of service between January and July 2024
and at least five months of claims during calendar year 2024. The first date of service represents
the earliest date in calendar year 2024 that the recipient received services from the nursing
facility; many of these recipients also received nursing facility services prior to January
2024.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MCPA monitor the UCA contractor to ensure CSRs are
performed and assess related liquidated damages as permitted by the
contract (repeat).
Finding 7
MCPA did not approve HCBS plans of service timely, resulting in numerous
recipients not receiving required services and payments for services that
were no longer medically necessary.
Analysis
MCPA did not approve HCBS plans of service timely, resulting in numerous
recipients not receiving required services and payments for services that were no
longer medically necessary. According to MCPA records, during fiscal year 2024
MCPA paid approximately $1.02 billion for HCBS on behalf of 97,900 recipients.
Recipients deemed eligible for HCBS work with Supports Planning providers
paid by MCPA to develop a plan that identifies the services to be received based
on their assessed needs (such as feeding, medication, and hygiene) which are
submitted to MCPA for approval.
We received an allegation to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline that recipients
were not approved for HCBS timely resulting in significant delays in recipients
receiving these services. Our review substantiated the allegation but did not
identify any matters that warranted referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s
Criminal Division. Specifically, our review of MCPA records as of June 2025
disclosed that 842 initial service plans had been pending approval for more than
15 days, including 234 plans that were pending approval between 3 months to 2.5
years. We also noted that the annual plan updates for 2,407 recipients were not
approved timely, including 1,293 plans that were pending approval between 3
months to 3.2 years.
The untimely approval of these plans is significant as our review of 20 of the
updated plans12 disclosed that 5 plans identified additional services (such as
environmental adaptations and transportation to appointments) that were not
provided to the recipient due to the plan not being approved. In addition, MCPA
paid $430,000 for services provided to 12 recipients despite the plans noting that
certain services were no longer needed. For example, one plan submitted in July
2022 reduced the recipient’s personal assistance services; however, the plan was
12 We selected updated plans that appeared to have a significant delay for approval.
24

--- Page 27 ---
not approved until October 2025, resulting in MCPA paying $54,000 for
unnecessary services.
In February 2024, MCPA contracted with the UCA contractor to supplement the
approval process and in October 2024 the UCA contractor assumed all
responsibility for approving HCBS plans. The contract provided that the UCA
contractor is to approve these plans within 15 days. As noted above, as of June
2025, the UCA contractor was still addressing the backlog of unapproved plans.
MCPA advised that the backlog should be resolved by April 2026.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MCPA ensure initial and updated HCBS plans are
approved timely and any additional services are added and unnecessary
services are discontinued, including those noted above.
Finding 8
MCPA did not establish adequate oversight to ensure that all CFC program
recipients received personal assistance services in accordance with their
individual plans of service.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that all CFC program recipients received personal
assistance services in accordance with their individual plans of service. CFC is a
community-based Medicaid program in which elderly or disabled individuals who
would otherwise live in a nursing facility are able to live in their own homes.
CFC recipients receive assistance with daily living activities from personal
assistance providers, under agreements with MCPA, in accordance with a plan of
service. LHDs contract with nurse monitors13 to evaluate the quality of personal
assistance services provided to the CFC recipients. State regulations provide that
the nurse monitor contact CFC recipients (virtual or in-person visits) at least every
6 months. According to State records, fiscal year 2024payments to personal
assistance and nurse monitoring providers (through the LHDs) totaled
approximately $477.9 million and $7.9 million, respectively.
Our review disclosed that as of June 2025, MCPA had not implemented a process
to ensure that each recipient received the required number of nurse monitoring
visits. According to MCPA records, 9,175 recipients were receiving personal
assistance services as of July 2025. Our analysis of recipient data in MDH’s
Long Term Services and Supports (LTSS) system disclosed that 229 recipients
13 MDH has designated LHDs as the sole providers of nurse monitoring services for CFC
recipients, however LHDs are permitted to subcontract this service.
25

--- Page 28 ---
had never had a nurse monitor visit despite receiving services for 6 months to
10.6 years. Additionally, 902 recipients (9.8 percent) were more than 60 days
overdue for their nurse monitoring visit, including 365 recipients who were
between 1 and 4.6 years overdue for a visit. The Baltimore City LHD accounted
for 293 of the 365 overdue recipients.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to November 2019 which also noted that the Baltimore City LHD
accounted for the majority of the overdue cases. MDH’s response to our prior
report, on behalf of MCPA, indicated that MCPA would establish a process to
ensure that participants received nurse monitoring services at the minimum
frequency by December 31, 2023 and that it had already taken action to address
the non-compliance by Baltimore City LHD. While MCPA had established
monitoring procedures, as noted above MCPA had not implemented this process
as of June 2025 and could not document specific actions it had taken to address
the continued non-compliance by Baltimore City LHD.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MCPA
a. implement a process to ensure that all CFC recipients are monitored by
nurses (repeat), and
b. develop a plan to address the longstanding instances of non-compliance
for the aforementioned LHD (repeat).
Finding 9
MCPA did not conduct the required audits of MDC and Supports Planning
providers in accordance with its policy.
Analysis
MCPA did not conduct the required audits of MDC and Supports Planning
providers in accordance with its policy. MDC is a community-based group
program that offers eligible Medicaid recipients health, social, and personal
support in a day-care setting in accordance with their individualized plans of care
as an alternative to institutional care. Supports Planning providers develop
service plans for recipients in the CFC program. According to MCPA records,
during calendar year 2024, MCPA paid 116 MDC and 27 Supports Planning
providers approximately $151.7 million and $58.3 million, respectively, for these
services.
 MCPA did not conduct audits for 26 (23 percent) of the 114 MDC providers
during calendar years 2023 and 2024. The audits are required by MCPA
26

--- Page 29 ---
policy14 and ensure that providers are in compliance with MDC program
requirements and the propriety of the related payments. In addition, our
review of 20 audits15 that were performed during calendar years 2023 and
2024 disclosed that 8 audits did not include the minimum number of recipients
and 3 did not review the minimum number of claims required by MCPA
policy.16 MCPA also did not document how it selected recipients and claims
tested and the specific claims reviewed for any of the 20 audits and did not
expand testing when these audits identified improper or unsupported claims
(totaling $97,000), as intended by its policy.
 MCPA’s annual audits of Supports Planning providers did not properly assess
whether the providers met program requirements and provided satisfactory
services to CFC recipients. Specifically, our test of 20 Supports Planning
provider audits17 performed in calendar year 2024 disclosed that none
assessed whether the provider met with recipients at the required intervals and
properly completed recipients’ plans of service. In addition, 8 audits did not
assess whether the providers’ staff had passed criminal background checks
and/or met education and work experience requirements. MCPA
subsequently provided us with completed criminal background checks for 17
of the 20 staff for whom the requirement was not assessed but was unable to
provide us with the results for the remaining 3 staff as of January 2026.
Similar conditions with MDC provider audits were commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports dating back to November 2019. MDH’s response to our
prior report, on behalf of MCPA, indicated that it would perform the required
number of MDC provider audits by the end of calendar year 2024 and that it had
already established a policy to expand testing when deficiencies are identified.
However, as noted above, MCPA did not audit all providers and did not expand
testing when the audits disclosed improper or unsupported claims.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MCPA
a. audit MDC providers in accordance with its policy (repeat), ensure that
audits include the minimum number of recipients and claims, and expand
audit testing when significant deficiencies are identified (repeat); and
14 In January 2025, MCPA policy related to MDC providers was updated to require audits once
every three years, instead of once every two years.
15 Test items were selected based on the number of claims reviewed and the total amount of
improper claims identified during the audit.
16 MCPA policy provides that MDC audits are to include testing of between 3 to 6 recipients
(based on the total recipients served by the provider) and 31 claims for each selected recipient.
17 Test items selected based on providers that received material payments in calendar year 2023.
27

--- Page 30 ---
b. properly assess whether the Supports Planning providers met program
requirements and provided satisfactory services to CFC recipients.
Information System Security and Controls
We determined that Finding 10 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the following finding, including the
analysis, related recommendations, along with MDH’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 11
MCPA did not ensure that vendor employees obtained criminal background
checks, as required by the contracts.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that vendor employees obtained criminal background
checks, as required by the contracts. MCPA advised us that individuals convicted
of certain crimes (such as theft, fraud, and violent offenses) should not have access
to PII and PHI. MCPA also advised that a criminal background check requirement
generally should be included in all contracts that involved PII or PHI. During our
fieldwork, we identified seven vendors18 with access to PII and PHI that MCPA
collectively paid $22.5 million during fiscal year 2025 according to State records,
five of which had requirements for criminal background checks.
Our review disclosed that MCPA did not obtain criminal background checks from
any of the five vendors whose contracts included a criminal background check
requirement. Subsequent to our inquiries, MCPA obtained the criminal
background checks from two of these vendors. Our review of the documentation
18 The services provided by these contractors included referring third-party health insurance
information, scanning medical documents, electronically recording claims data in MMIS II,
auditing hospital claims, managing recipients’ dental benefits, and performing utilization reviews.
28

--- Page 31 ---
obtained from these vendors did not identify any individuals with criminal
convictions. As of December 2025, MCPA was unable to provide us with
background checks for the remaining three vendors.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MCPA
a. ensure that all required criminal background checks are obtained and
reviewed, including those noted above; and
b. take appropriate action for any individual identified as having a criminal
conviction.
Reconciliation of MMIS II to State Accounting Records
Finding 12
MCPA did not have procedures to reconcile Medicaid expenditures recorded
in MMIS II with the State’s accounting records and could not readily explain
$200.9 million in expenditures that were not recorded in MMIS II.
Analysis
MCPA did not have procedures to reconcile Medicaid expenditures recorded in
MMIS II with the State’s accounting records for fiscal years 2023 and 2024,
resulting in unexplained variances totaling approximately $200.9 million going
undetected. According to State accounting records, Medicaid expenditures
totaled $12.7 billion in both fiscal years 2023 and 2024.
After we brought this matter to MCPA’s attention in March 2025, MCPA
performed reconciliations for these years and identified that expenditures in the
State’s accounting records exceeded expenditures in MMIS II during fiscal years
2023 and 2024 by $15.4 million and $185.5 million, respectively. MCPA could
not readily explain these discrepancies and advised that it did not consider the
variances significant enough to pursue further. Medicaid expenditures must be
recorded in MMIS II to enable MDH to recover federal reimbursement for the
cost of the services. The aforementioned variances raise concerns about whether
MCPA has recorded all eligible expenditures in MMIS II to enable the recovery
of federal funds.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MCPA establish procedures to periodically (at least
annually) reconcile financial activity recorded in MMIS II and the State’s
accounting records and resolve any variances, including those noted above.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) for the period
beginning April 1, 2022 and ending March 31, 2025. The audit scope for this
audit included MCPA’s primary administrative functions and excluded the
procedures and controls over the Managed Care Program, the Behavioral Health
Administration’s Administrative Service Organization, and the Maryland
Pharmacy Program, which are reviewed under three separate audits (as previously
explained in the Background Information section of this report).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCPA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the Medicaid Management Information System
(MMIS II), recipient and provider eligibility, third party insurance recoveries,
nursing facilities, hospital services, dental services, Medicare enrollment, and
home, community-based services programs, and information systems security and
controls. We also reviewed MCPA’s oversight of certain contractors which assist
MCPA in the administration and monitoring of these programs. In addition, we
reviewed certain activities related to a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline. Finally, we determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA by MDH’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other
Units. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls
over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
and programs and an assessment of MCPA’s compliance with those laws and
30

--- Page 33 ---
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
MCPA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 1, 2022 to March 31, 2025, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MCPA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from Medicaid Management Information System (such as
claims payments and recipient information) for the purpose of selecting test items
and performing data analytics. We also extracted data from the Maryland
Department of Health’s Vital Records database, as well as from certain other
State records, such as those maintained by the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services and the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency, for the
purpose of testing recipient eligibility. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
31

--- Page 34 ---
MCPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MCPA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCPA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
32

--- Page 35 ---
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to MCPA and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
In our preceding audit report, we reported that MCPA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. Our current audit disclosed that
MCPA’s accountability and compliance level remains unsatisfactory. The
primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory rating were the significance of
our audit findings and the number of repeat findings. Our rating conclusion has
been made solely pursuant to the aforementioned law and rating guidelines
approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee. The rating process is not
a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
The response from MDH, on behalf of MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH
regarding the results of our review of its response.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of April 2026 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
Medical Care Programs Managed Care Program, known as
1 Administration – Managed HealthChoice including oversight of the 01/14/26
Care Program nine private Managed Care Organizations
Behavioral Health
Administration and Medical  Behavioral Health Administration
Care Programs Administration  Medical Care Programs Administration
2 10/03/25
- Administrative Service Administrative Service Organization for
Organization for Behavioral Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
3 08/25/25
Children and Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
Developmental Disabilities
4 Developmental Disabilities Administration 06/18/25
Administration
 22 Health Professional Boards and
5 Regulatory Services Commissions 04/09/25
 The Office of Health Care Quality
6 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 03/19/25
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
Prevention and Health
 Office of Population Health
Promotion Administration -
Improvement
Office of
 Office of Preparedness and Response
Population Health
7  Office of Provider Engagement and 08/09/24
Improvement -
Regulation – Office of Controlled
Office of Preparedness and
Substances Administration
Response - Office of Provider
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Engagement and Regulation
Regulation – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
8 Pharmacy Services Pharmacy Services 08/09/24
9 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
34

--- Page 37 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of April 2026 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center
State Psychiatric Hospital
10  Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
Centers
 Springfield Hospital Center
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review
Health Regulatory
11 Commission 01/25/24
Commissions
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive
Director for Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and
12 Disabilities 10/19/23
Other Units
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
13 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities  Potomac Center
14 10/24/22
Residential Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
Office of the Chief Medical
15 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
Examiner
35

--- Page 38 ---
APPENDIX A
Auditor’s Comments on the Maryland Department of Health’s Response
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) cover letter indicates that the
unsatisfactory rating does not accurately reflect the current compliance
environment, operational controls, or corrective action progress. In addition, the
letter asserts that the report does not sufficiently distinguish between unresolved
compliance failures and issues already actively remediated or substantially
corrected prior to issuance, and does not adequately reflect the operational
complexities associated with administering one of the State’s largest and most
federally regulated programs. The letter further asserts significant concerns
regarding the audit methodology and resulting characterization of MCPA’s
operational performance, including that the report does not consistently account
for corrective actions already implemented prior to report issuance or provide
sufficient transparency regarding how progress toward remediation is evaluated
and reflected in the final audit determination.
As noted in the Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology section, our audit
covered the period beginning April 1, 2022 and ending March 31, 2025. Our
assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls in
place at the time of our fieldwork and our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during this
period. Furthermore, the Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology section
states that our reports generally do not address activities we reviewed that are
functioning properly.
Our audit report also clearly describes the factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating, which were the significance of the findings and the number
of repeat findings. These findings, which MDH management generally agreed
were accurate, were due to conditions that existed during the period reviewed for
which the referenced corrective action had not been implemented. As indicated in
MDH’s response, the corrective action proposed by MDH for all
recommendations is anticipated to be completed in the future or was completed
subsequent to our fieldwork. The impact of this corrective action was not
included in our scope and will be evaluated during our next audit.
As a result, we continue to believe that our report provides an accurate
characterization of the procedures and controls in place during the period covered
by our audit, and that the unsatisfactory rating is warranted and the related results
are supported and presented in a fair and transparent manner.

--- Page 39 ---
APPENDIX B
May 13, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for the opportunity to review the draft audit report of the Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA) for the period beginning April 1, 2022 and ending March 31, 2025. The
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) remains committed to maintaining strong program
integrity across Medicaid, safeguarding taxpayer resources, and ensuring beneficiaries receive
accurate and timely services.
MCPA has treated every finding identified in this audit as a priority and acted decisively to
implement targeted corrective actions focused on strengthening internal controls, enhancing
system automation, and improving vendor oversight. Since the conclusion of the Office of
Legislative Audits (OLA)’s fieldwork last year, MCPA has fully resolved 5 of the 12 findings
identified in the report – including 2 repeat findings – and partially resolved 1 additional repeat
finding, with most remaining corrective actions for the remaining 6 findings expected to be
completed by the end of 2026.
While the Department values OLA’s recommendations to improve MCPA’s ability to effectively
deliver services, MCPA does not agree that an “unsatisfactory” rating accurately reflects the
Administration’s current compliance environment, operational controls, or corrective action
progress. As written, the report does not sufficiently distinguish between unresolved compliance
failures and issues already actively remediated or substantially corrected prior to issuance. In
several instances, the report also does not adequately reflect the operational complexities
1

--- Page 40 ---
associated with administering one of the State’s largest and most federally regulated programs
during a period of significant system modernization and transition.
Additionally, the Department has significant concerns regarding aspects of the audit
methodology and resulting characterization of MCPA’s operational performance. The
Department is concerned that the report does not consistently account for corrective actions
already implemented prior to report issuance or provide sufficient transparency regarding how
progress toward remediation is evaluated and reflected in final audit determinations.
The Department’s detailed responses to each audit finding are enclosed. MDH remains fully
committed to compliance with applicable federal and state requirements, responsible stewardship
of public resources, and continuous operational improvement across the Maryland Medicaid
program. We also welcome continued dialogue regarding how long-term corrective action
progress and complex operational modernization efforts can be more accurately reflected within
future audit reporting.
If you have any questions or require additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Meena Seshamani, M.D., Ph.D.
Secretary
Enclosures
cc: Kate Wolff, MPA, Chief of Staff, MDH
Emily Berg, Deputy Chief of Staff, MDH
Perrie T. Briskin, Deputy Secretary, Health Care Financing and Medicaid, MDH
Liz Schuelke, Chief of Staff, MDH
Clint Hackett, Deputy Secretary for Operations, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, Internal Controls, Audit
Compliance & Information Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
2

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Recipient Eligibility
Finding 1
MCPA did not ensure that issues identified with Medicaid eligibility
determinations were corrected and that DHS and MHBE conducted timely
eligibility redeterminations, potentially resulting in payments on behalf of
ineligible individuals.
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. issues identified with initial eligibility determinations, including those
noted above, are timely resolved by DHS and the LHDs; and
b. DHS and MHBE conduct required annual redeterminations and take
appropriate action when redeterminations are not completed, including
those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Due to emergency federal legislation passed during the COVID-19
additional comments as pandemic, state health agencies were mandated to temporarily suspend
deemed necessary. annual redeterminations. The Families First CoronaVirus Response Act
2020 required States to provide continuous eligibility, and
redeterminations did not resume until April 2023 with the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2023. States were required to maintain original
certification periods so the entire Medicaid population could not be fully
redetermined until the end of the public health emergency (PHE) until
March 2024.
It is also important to note that a "flagged" status in the program
integrity review process does not confirm ineligibility; rather, it signifies
a procedural requirement for further evidence, such as a signature or
updated income verification. MDH acknowledges OLA’s best practice
recommendation for more timely follow-up to ensure these internal
findings are resolved by delegated agencies within prescribed
timeframes.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/1/2026
Page 1 of 25

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of
corrective action or
explain disagreement. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) remains committed to
ensuring the integrity of Medicaid eligibility determinations. The 306
cases cited by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) represent
instances identified through MCPA’s internal Program Integrity (PI)
quality assurance reviews where additional documentation or
caseworker verification was required to satisfy program standards.
MCPA has taken immediate steps to strengthen the resolution of issues
identified during quarterly eligibility reviews:
● MCPA has implemented a centralized tracking log to monitor
each finding and its resolution status.
● Effective August 1, 2026, MCPA will require DHS and LHDs to
respond to all PI findings within 60 days.
● MDH has established a formal escalation process for items
remaining outstanding beyond the required timeframe, ensuring
executive leadership involvement for unresolved cases.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of MCPA has taken steps to ensure that annual redeterminations are
corrective action or conducted timely and that appropriate corrective actions occur when
explain disagreement. redeterminations are not completed. The 1,950 identified cases are non-
Modified Adjusted Gross Income (non-MAGI) and must be completed
by the Department of Human Services (DHS).
DHS (non-MAGI)
In order to hold DHS accountable for performing annual
redeterminations, MCPA is committed to working in close collaboration
with our partner agency to monitor redetermination reports, identify
overdue reviews, and escalate with leadership when necessary.
DHS has requested to have a new Annual Redetermination Overdue
report generated in the Eligibility & Enrollment (E&E) system that will
identify initiated redeterminations that remain incomplete. After that
report is functional, it will be generated monthly and reviewed by both
MCPA and DHS staff to identify overdue or incomplete
redeterminations.
MCPA will require DHS to complete all overdue determinations within
30 days and will clearly communicate this expectation. If overdue
Page 2 of 25

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
redeterminations are not completed within the established timeframe,
MCPA will implement and communicate appropriate corrective actions.
In addition, MCPA is working on improving our technical systems and
collaboration with Maryland Benefits to develop an enhanced automated
process within the E&E system for tracking and coding redetermination
cases not processed by the 45th day. This system feature will further
strengthen oversight and timeliness of redetermination processing.
The issue cited in this audit finding applies to non-MAGI cases and
therefore does not apply to the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange that
handles MAGI cases.
Page 3 of 25

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MCPA did not ensure that recipients age 65 or older applied for Medicare, as
required by State regulations.
We recommend that MCPA ensure recipients age 65 or older have applied
for Medicare, as required by State regulations.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide In OLA’s analysis, it is noted that MCPA paid $145 million in claims
additional comments as during calendar year 2024 for 4,873 recipients who were not enrolled in
deemed necessary. Medicare despite appearing potentially eligible based on age and
coverage group. In March 2026, the Social Security Administration
informed MCPA that 1634 designated states, including Maryland, had
been impacted by longstanding technical issue, that a significant portion
of Maryland MCPA population (67% or 3,251 individuals) were
supposed to be auto-enrolled in Medicare due to their Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) status but were never enrolled in Medicare due to
the SSA system glitch. As a result of this system's issue, affected
individuals remained enrolled solely in Medicaid coverage despite
otherwise meeting the criteria for automatic Medicare enrollment. The
issue seems to date back prior to the audit period and affected
individuals vary from age 64 to age 99 affecting multiple cohorts and
enrollment years.
Beginning in April 2026, MCPA confirmed with SSA that SSA will
prospectively enroll affected individuals into Medicare Part B and pay
the applicable Part A premium where appropriate. Individuals
approaching age 65 will receive proper enrollment upon attaining
Medicare eligibility age moving forward. This will greatly help to ensure
that recipients age 65 or older have applied for Medicare.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of MCPA agrees with the importance of ensuring that Medicaid recipients
corrective action or transition to Medicare upon reaching age 65, in accordance with
explain disagreement. COMAR 10.09.24.03. As the payer of last resort, Medicaid requires
beneficiaries to utilize all other available health insurance resources.
MDH currently operates a proactive "courtesy notice" system, where
recipients are notified 90 days prior to their 65th birthday of the
requirement to apply for Medicare. MDH acknowledges the OLA
recommendation to provide more formal oversight to ensure that the
Page 4 of 25

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Department of Human Services (DHS) verifies that all recipients aged
65 and older have applied for Medicare.
MCPA also recognizes that, despite the issue originating from
inconsistencies and limitations within external SSA Medicare enrollment
data, additional safeguards and oversight mechanisms are needed within
the eligibility process to better identify and address individuals who may
not have successfully transitioned to Medicare coverage. Maryland relies
heavily on federal data exchanges and SSA files support these
determinations. MCPA acknowledges that supplemental monitoring,
enhanced system controls, and more formalized procedures may reduce
the risk of individuals remaining enrolled in full Medicaid coverage
without appropriate Medicare enrollment.
This process will include the following controls:
● Monthly Monitoring: DHS will provide MCPA, on a monthly
basis in advance of the standing MDH/DHS Benchmark
meeting, a report identifying all individuals who became
Medicare-eligible within the prior 30 days, including an indicator
of whether a Medicare application has been submitted.
● Delinquency Tracking: Individuals who have not applied for
Medicare within 30 days of eligibility will be classified as non-
compliant. MCPA will maintain and track these cases as part of a
delinquency log.
● Case Review and Accountability: During the monthly Program
Integrity meeting, DHS will be required to report on all non-
compliant cases, including outreach efforts and actions taken to
secure compliance.
● Escalation Protocol: Cases remaining non-compliant beyond 60
days will be escalated to leadership within both MCPA and DHS
through a formal monthly escalation report.
● Advance Outreach: MCPA will continue its existing process of
issuing advance notice to individuals approximately 90 days
prior to their 65th birthday, reminding them of the requirement to
apply for Medicare.
● System Analysis: MCPA will work with Maryland Benefits to
address identified system vulnerabilities and implement
enhancements in the E&E system designed to strengthen
verification and tracking of individuals required to apply for
Medicare. This control will reduce the administrative burden
Page 5 of 25

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
associated with prior identified controls as the MCPA works
towards this solution
Page 6 of 25

--- Page 47 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover
questionable Medicaid payments including $9.2 million in payments on
behalf of recipients who were incarcerated or deceased at the time of service.
We recommend that MCPA establish effective processes over questionable
Medicaid payments. Specifically, MCPA should establish processes to
a. identify, prevent, and recover improper fee-for-service payments related
to incarcerated recipients (repeat); and
b. ensure deceased recipients are removed from Medicaid in a timely
manner and investigate and pursue the recovery of improper payments
after the recipients’ dates of death, including those noted in our analysis
(repeat).
Page 7 of 25

--- Page 48 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Partially Agree
Please provide MCPA follows all regulations outlined in COMAR 10.67.02.06 to
additional comments as disenroll enrollees on the first day of the month following the month in
deemed necessary. which the Department verifies an enrollee is an inmate. As a result of
this regulation, MCPA cannot recover funds paid for any date prior to
the Department receiving and verifying the data even if payments were
made after the enrollee’s incarceration date.
Of the $9.2 million in payments highlighted in this finding, $6.4 million
is associated with the auditors’ set of 2,397 recipients that OLA’s match
identified as being incarcerated during the current audit period. Of the
2,397 cases, only 20 were identified as enrolled in an MCO and
subsequently disenrolled. If a case was not enrolled in an MCO, there is
no action to be taken. MCPA properly disenrolled these individuals,
according to regulation, in the immediate month following verification.
MCPA is currently reviewing the remaining $2.8 million in potentially
improper claims payments, with review expected to be complete by
December 31, 2026, and will pursue recovery of any payments
determined to be improper.
3(a) Regarding the data cited in OLA’s MCPA Primary Discussion
Notes, OLA independently obtains incarceration data from DPSCS that
differs from the dataset MCPA receives.
For the incarceration records MCPA does receive, the matching and
suspension process functions as designed. MCPA uses a conservative,
probability-based matching methodology on four core identifiers (first
name, last name, SSN, DOB), triggering automated suspension only for
100% matches, with near-matches manually reviewed weekly. When
incarceration is confirmed, managed care capitation is stopped and
Medicaid coverage is maintained, consistent with federal rules that
require continued Medicaid enrollment for inpatient hospital services.
3(b) Regarding the data cited in OLA’s MCPA Primary Discussion
Notes, MCPA currently follows established policy for completing
automated disenrollment of MAGI cases through the systems of record
using system matches, such as those from Maryland Vital Records.
However, this automated process is only effective for cases that match
with 100% accuracy and reflect deaths occurring within the State of
Page 8 of 25

--- Page 49 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Maryland. Cases involving deaths that occur outside of Maryland, or
those identified as partial matches, require manual caseworker
validation. This process is necessary to ensure accuracy, as the State
seeks to avoid erroneously terminating Medical Assistance benefits.
Reinstating benefits after an individual is incorrectly marked as deceased
can be administratively complex and resource-intensive.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/27
Please provide details of
corrective action or MCPA will continue to collaborate with DPSCS to obtain the most
explain disagreement.
conclusive data lists ensuring that the identification of incarcerated
recipients is conducted accurately and promptly.
MCPA has begun to investigate the full set of 2,397 recipients that
OLA’s match identified as being incarcerated during the current audit
period. Of the 2,397 cases:
● 1,055 cases identified by OLA could not be found in our
eligibility files.
● 668 cases were matched but were not enrolled in an MCO, so
MCO disenrollment was not required and no capitation payments
were at risk.
● 594 cases were appropriately disenrolled during the audit period
● 60 cases were present in our eligibility files as members enrolled
in an MCO but they did not meet the specified match criteria,
including First Name, Last Name, SSN and DOB. If we cannot
match the cases, we take no further action to avoid the risk of
improperly disenrolling someone from coverage.
● 20 cases were in an MCO and were disenrolled.
In April 2026, MCPA completed an assessment of the feasibility of
implementing new functionality within the MMIS claims subsystem to
identify and prevent outpatient claims submitted for recipients with
verified incarceration status. The assessment determined that the
required system modifications, including development, interface
creation, and end-to-end testing, represent a significant level of effort
and are estimated to require approximately 12–18 months for full
implementation. Due to the complexity of establishing a new inmate data
interface with the MMIS claims subsystem, as well as competing
Departmental priorities related to HR-1 initiatives and other critical
Page 9 of 25

--- Page 50 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
system efforts, implementation and testing activities are not expected to
be completed in less than 12 months.
In the interim, MCPA will implement a new Eligibility Verification
System (EVS) business rule to notify providers that incarcerated
recipients are eligible only for inpatient services, thereby strengthening
controls intended to prevent inappropriate outpatient payments.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of
corrective action or
explain disagreement. MCPA concurs with the recommendation and has processes in place to
identify deceased recipients, terminate eligibility, and pursue recovery of
improper payments to providers when services are paid after a
recipient’s date of death.
MCPA utilizes automated system matches with systems of record,
including Maryland Vital Records, to identify individuals reported as
deceased and to automatically terminate Medicaid eligibility. This
automated process is effective when records match with a high degree of
certainty and when deaths occur within the State of Maryland. Cases
involving deaths that occur outside of Maryland, or those that result in
partial or near matches, require manual validation by eligibility
caseworkers to ensure accuracy and prevent the erroneous termination of
Medicaid coverage. This validation step is necessary because incorrectly
coding a recipient as deceased can result in inappropriate loss of
coverage and requires significant administrative effort to restore
eligibility.
MCPA monitors deceased case closure activity by Local Health
Departments (LHDs) and Local Departments of Social Services (LDSS)
for cases requiring manual review. Monitoring activities include regular
reporting and notification to executive leadership when local offices do
not comply with established timeliness standards, as well as follow-up
actions to ensure cases are resolved.
MCPA is currently reviewing approximately $2.8 million in potentially
improper claims payments, representing 18,086 claims for 4,510
individuals, for services paid after the recipients’ dates of death. The
agency will complete its review by December 31, 2026, and will pursue
recovery of any payments determined to be improper.
Page 10 of 25

--- Page 51 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
These actions will strengthen oversight of deceased recipient case
processing and help ensure that eligibility is terminated promptly and
that improper payments are identified and recovered when applicable.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MDH agrees with the recommendations,
certain comments in the response to our analysis appeared to conflict or
deflect attention from the facts presented. First, MDH asserts that almost all
of the population was not enrolled in MCOs and that it timely removes
recipients from MCOs when they meet certain match criteria. Our analysis
clearly explains that the improper payments we identified consist of fee-for-
service claims (not MCO capitation payments) and therefore, the recipients’
MCO enrollment status is not relevant to this finding.
Second, MDH asserts that it uses a conservative process to identify
individuals that are 100 percent matched to state records. While this
methodology is reasonable for an automated process, our analysis identified
cases that were not identified by this match and the failure to investigate
certain matches including those cited in our analysis. As noted in our finding,
during our fieldwork MCPA could not readily explain why the recipients cited
were not identified and/or investigated to prevent future payments.
Page 11 of 25

--- Page 52 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid eligibility
information were processed timely and accurately.
We recommend that MCPA ensure recipient eligibility information is
updated timely and accurately, and that errors to recipient eligibility
information in MMIS II are corrected (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of MPCA is working to address this finding in two parts:
corrective action or 1. Address the backlog of changes that require correction.
explain disagreement. 2. Address the root cause of the erroneous data by making targeted
system updates in MHBE’s Health Benefit Exchange, E&E, and
MMIS systems.
1. Address the Backlog
A Certified Turn-a-Round Document or CTAD is systematically
generated when daily eligibility transactions which are transmitted from
the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (HBX) and Department of
Human Services/MD Benefits’ (E&E) enrollment and eligibility systems
fail to successfully interface/batch with MMIS due to errors or
exceptions.
As mentioned, a lack of sufficient staffing coupled with a considerable
rise in CTADs received following the Public Health Emergency are
primary factors contributing to the backlog.
Since February 2025, MCPA has implemented a multi-phase process to
address the backlog:
● Phase 1: "Backlog Elimination," began on February 1, 2025 to
identify challenges, and implement a comprehensive monitoring
and strategic framework to track and eliminate the 2021 - 2024
backlog. To date, years 2021-2024 have been completed.
● Phase 2: "Workgroup Implementation," began April 2025 and is
currently in process. The workgroup includes staff from MCPA,
MHBE and DHS who are collaborating to determine the
Page 12 of 25

--- Page 53 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
underlying cause of the increase in errors and to find systematic
solutions that will prevent further erroneous and duplicated
CTAD requests. A comprehensive report detailing the findings
and next steps was delivered by April 30, 2026.
● Phase 3: "Operational Reset and Optimization" is currently in
process. On March 11, 2026, the management team initiated
strategic planning to evaluate current operational processes to
determine whether they remain efficient or require restructuring
to meet current needs. The planning also included accessing
current staffing levels to identify training opportunities to
maximize the performance of existing resources. During the
assessment, MCPA identified 96,199 CTADs in the queue for
calendar year 2025. The goal is to clear the 2025 cases by the end
of 2026. Achieving this milestone is contingent on onboarding 5
freeze-exempt PINs timely, especially considering the unit
currently has 13 vacancies.
● Phase 4: "Sustainment," is scheduled to launch in 2026. This
phase will establish a proactive operational model to manage
ongoing workload beginning 2025.
By implementing this phased strategy, MCPA aims to not only eliminate
the current backlog but also to establish effective systemic processes and
workflows that will prevent future backlogs.
2. Fix the Root Cause
Preliminary analysis indicates that data inconsistencies sent by the HBX
and E&E remain the primary cause in the transmission of erroneous data
to MMIS. By minimizing the frequency of high reporting error codes,
management can reallocate resources to concentrate on addressing the
backlog.
Office of Eligibility Services technical leads are actively collaborating
with the system’s staff from MHBE and DHS to assess the manner in
which specific transactions are transmitted to MMIS, as well as the
purpose of these transactions, in order to identify deficiencies in the
process. A comprehensive report detailing the findings to include
recommendations, next steps and timeline for implementing action items
is expected to be submitted by April 30, 2026.
Page 13 of 25

--- Page 54 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Third-Party Liability
Finding 5
MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential third-party health
insurance information were investigated and recorded in MMIS II, which
could result in MCPA improperly paying claims that should have been paid
by a third-party.
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. all third-party health insurance information provided by its third-party
liability vendor are interfaced with MMIS II (repeat), and
b. all MCO insurance referrals are recorded into MMIS II timely (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Partially Agree
Please provide For the five MCOs using the MDH interface to send automatic third-
additional comments as party liability (TPL) file transmissions, the TPL data is loaded into
deemed necessary. MMIS, where the following benefits have been achieved for both MDH
and the MCOs:
1) Elimination of the paper Lead Letters; the creation and keying
into MMIS
2) Increased timeliness of TPL data in MMIS
3) Reduced keying errors
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/1/26
Please provide details of MCPA has addressed the Corrective action we proposed in 2023 “to
corrective action or understand why the carrier text file is not interfacing and also requested
explain disagreement.
a master file of codes that the vendor utilizes and are in contact with the
vendor to have them added to the system.”
As a result, our TPL Vendor is already properly interfaced with MMIS.
What MCPA discovered is that TPL Vendor carrier codes are different
from our carrier codes in MMIS. The cases OLA found were not a result
of improper interface but this carrier code mismatch.
MCPA identified this issue in August of 2023, since then MCPA made a
master list of carrier codes and presented them to them to reconcile the
error report that is delivered from the MMIS system. MCPA submits the
error listing to our third party vendor on a monthly basis. Our third party
Page 14 of 25

--- Page 55 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
vendor corrects the information on the file and resubmits it to MMIS
within the 90 days timeline.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/1/26
Please provide details of Five MCOs are already transmitting the TPL/insurance referrals into
corrective action or MMIS II. Once the final 4 MCOs have completed testing with the MDH
explain disagreement. interface and have been migrated to production, all subsequent monthly
TPL files from all MCOs will be loaded into MMIS upon receipt of their
TPL file, thereby satisfying 5b for timeliness to record insurance
referrals into MMIS II.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MDH indicates that it partially agrees with our
analysis, the response does not contradict the facts presented in the finding.
Page 15 of 25

--- Page 56 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Program Oversight
Finding 6
MCPA did not ensure that the UCA contractor performed continued stay
reviews (CSRs) of Medicaid recipients in nursing facilities.
We recommend that MCPA monitor the UCA contractor to ensure CSRs are
performed and assess related liquidated damages as permitted by the
contract (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Partially Accurate
Please provide MCPA disputes that it did not apply any liquidated damages related to
additional comments as CSRs. As shared with the OLA auditors, MCPA applied for liquidated
deemed necessary. damages based on the UCA’s contractual obligations to provide an
annual census. MCPA agrees with the recommendation that the UCA
must ensure that nursing facilities complete and submit CSRs and that
MCPA will continue to assess related liquidated damages as permitted
by the contract.
Recommendation 6 Partially Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/27
Please provide details of MCPA disputes that it did not apply any liquidated damages related to
corrective action or CSRs. As shared with the OLA auditors, MCPA applied for liquidated
explain disagreement. damages based on the UCA’s contractual obligations to provide an
annual census. In March 2025, the UCA was expected to provide an
annual census used to ensure all CSRs are completed by nursing
facilities. As required by the contract, the first census report was due in
March 2025. It was not received and MCPA applied a liquidated damage
of $105,688.99. It is also important to note that the liquidated damage
associated with the census is an annual assessment as written in the
contract, and this would have been the first opportunity to assess the
damage since the contract started in September 2024. The annual census
is important because it identifies nursing facility residents that are due
for a CSR.
The UCA contract has a liquidated damage of $75 per occurrence when
the UCA fails to identify the need for and conduct a CSR. The UCA
began using claims data with the initiation of the September 2024
contract to identify missing CSRs and is working closely with nursing
facilities to complete those CSRs that are missing or past due. This
reconciliation will ensure that no CSRs are missing for claims paid to
Page 16 of 25

--- Page 57 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
nursing facilities. Because the UCA is utilizing this claims data and
completing CSRs in partnership with nursing facilities upon
identification of a missing or late CSR, the $75 liquidated damage per
occurrence was not applied. The claims reconciliation is expected to be
completed by April 30, 2026, as such, MCPA will begin applying the
$75 liquidated damage beginning May 1, 2026.
To resolve this finding, MCPA is in the process of moving the CSR
process into the State’s data management system, LTSSMaryland.
LTSSMaryland is a participant based system as opposed to the provider
based system run by the UCA, and is better suited to manage the CSR
process. Scoping has begun to move the CSR process into the State's
data management system, LTSSMaryland. MCPA expects full
implementation to take 12 to 18 months with an anticipated effective
date of May 1, 2027. As of May 4, 2026, MCPA completed the initial
scoping and the project plan was submitted to the software developer,
FEi, for a cost estimate and confirmation of the project timeline.
In the meantime, MCPA continues to work with the UCA on identifying
residents who require CSRs. A combination of claims data, initial level
of care requests, and facility censuses are being used to create the UCA’s
CSR census. The UCA’s next annual census report was due to MCPA by
3/2/2026. The census was not provided by the deadline, as such, a
liquidated damage of 10% of the March 2026 invoice will be applied. As
the UCA identifies facilities that are non-compliant with completion of
past due CSRs, they are working individually with the facilities to get
them caught up. The UCA is notifying MCPA of providers who continue
to be non-compliant in spite of UCA outreach and education.
Auditor’s Comment: MDH partially agrees with the analysis and
recommendation but asserts that it assessed liquidated damages against the UCA
contractor for not providing an annual census that was to be used to ensure all
CSRs are completed. However, the focus of this finding was not on the liquidated
damages associated with the annual census. Rather, the finding relates to MDH
not ensuring the UCA contractor completed CSRs and not pursuing liquidated
damages when CSRs are not completed, as provided for in the contract. As
explained in our analysis and acknowledged by MDH in its response, MDH did
not assess these additional liquidated damages for each missing CSR as provided
for in the contract.
Page 17 of 25

--- Page 58 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
MCPA did not approve HCBS plans of service timely, resulting in numerous
recipients not receiving required services and payments for services that
were no longer medically necessary.
We recommend that MCPA ensure initial and updated HCBS plans are
approved timely and any additional services are added and unnecessary
services are discontinued, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The analysis is correct but we would like to further clarify that our
additional comments as definition of approving HCBS “timely” is 15 days now that the
deemed necessary. Utilization Control Agent (UCA) took over in October 2024.
This finding references plans of service for the Community Options
Waiver, Community First Choice (CFC), Community Personal
Assistance Services (CPAS), and Increased Community Services (ICS)
programs. Prior to October 2024, MCPA’s Office of Long Term
Services & Supports rendered plan of service determinations. In light of
the long standing plan of service backlog, in 2018, the plan of service
review and determination process was added to the request for proposals
for the Utilization Control Agent (UCA) to assume this work. The UCA
contract with the plan of service review/determination process began in
September 2024, and the UCA fully assumed responsibility for rending
determinations in October 2024.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of This audit finding references the plan of service backlog that was fully
corrective action or resolved in December 2025, ahead of the anticipated April 2026
explain disagreement. resolution plan.
The UCA contract monitor reviews a monthly report to ensure plan of
service determinations are made within contractual timeframes.
Liquidated damages are applied to plan of service determinations that
fall outside of those contractual obligations.
Page 18 of 25

--- Page 59 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
MCPA did not establish adequate oversight to ensure that all CFC program
recipients received personal assistance services in accordance with their
individual plans of service.
We recommend that MCPA
a. implement a process to ensure that all CFC recipients are monitored by
nurses (repeat), and
b. develop a plan to address the longstanding instances of non-compliance
for the aforementioned LHD (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide It is important to note the significant progress on this issue that is not
additional comments as reflected in the analysis.
deemed necessary.
MCPA executed Nurse Monitoring Agreements with each Local Health
Department (LHD) performing nursing monitoring services on May 15,
2024. The purpose of these agreements were to establish clear standards
for the nurse monitoring service, its delivery, and its continuous
monitoring by both the LHDs and the Office of Long Term Services and
Supports (OLTSS). LHDs were required to begin adhering to the
timelines for specific activities as of July 1, 2024 pursuant to the
agreement. In October 2024, OLTSS evaluated the degree to which each
LHD was meeting the required timelines for specific activities based on
a random sample. The results were provided to each LHD by 12/31/2024
to assist the LHD in making changes, if necessary, before the annual
evaluation. The first annual evaluation period was July 1, 2024 - June
30, 2025, which began in July 2025 and ended on 10/31/2025.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The last annual nurse monitoring audit/evaluation occurred 10/31/2025.
corrective action or OLA acknowledged OLTSS' progress and indicated that this finding was
explain disagreement. still noted because the resolution date was not final until 10/31/2025,
which is after the conclusion of their audit period. Improved compliance
is anticipated going forward based on feedback from this first formal
evaluation.
As a result of the annual evaluation ending 10/31/2025, OLTSS required
11 Quality Improvement Plans (QIPs) from LHDs that did not meet the
compliance threshold for specific performance measures. Since the last
update OLTSS has approved 10 of 11 QIPs and received the initial
Page 19 of 25

--- Page 60 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
monthly report in February 2026 from 10 of 11 affected jurisdictions.
Following OLTSS feedback, revised documentation has been submitted
for the outstanding QIP, pending OLTSS review. OLTSS continues to
provide technical assistance (recurring or on demand) to noncompliant
jurisdictions to support data analysis and to make recommendations to
improve compliance
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/31/26
Please provide details of OLTSS is evaluating LHD compliance with the timeliness of nurse
corrective action or monitoring visits monthly using reports from LTSSMaryland, and
explain disagreement. communicating with each LHDs on the outstanding visits that must
occur. This process occurs in addition to the annual audit mentioned in
recommendation A, which is the formal process in which LHDs are
monitored annually.
Additionally, OLTSS is currently building multiple enhancements into
the LTSSMaryland system to support LHD data needs related to nurse
monitoring such as expanded access in different sections of the system,
enhancing existing reports with additional data points, and updates to the
nurse monitoring module for increased visibility of critical information.
These system enhancements are anticipated to launch in May 2026.
Page 20 of 25

--- Page 61 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
MCPA did not conduct the required audits of MDC and Supports Planning
providers in accordance with its policy.
We recommend that MCPA
a. audit MDC providers in accordance with its policy (repeat), ensure that
audits include the minimum number of recipients and claims, and expand
audit testing when significant deficiencies are identified (repeat); and
b. properly assess whether the Supports Planning providers met program
requirements and provided satisfactory services to CFC recipients.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The finding is correct for the majority of the audit period. In January
additional comments as 2025, the MDC audit schedule was revised (e.g., audit every three years
deemed necessary. instead of two years) to better align with staffing resources.
The finding for the OLTSS SPA audit process is factually accurate.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The MDC audit process and procedures have been updated to align with
corrective action or staffing resources to ensure that audits are conducted for each MDC
explain disagreement. every three years.
To enhance audit procedures, a minimum claims testing standard (e.g.,
defined number of claims per participant) has been established, and each
audit must require documentation of selection methodology and claims
tested. Additionally, triggers for further testing should expand beyond
just recoverable findings to include systemic or high-risk deficiencies,
while basic audit coverage monitoring is implemented to ensure all
providers are audited within required timeframes.
The revised Standard Operating Procedure was already implemented to
address the audit findings. OLA acknowledged that this update occurred,
however this change occurred during the audit period. As such, OLA
still cited this finding.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of All Supports Planning Agencies were audited for 2019-2023 activities
corrective action or by end of calendar year 2024. OLTSS completed all audits of 2024
explain disagreement. activities in calendar year 2025 on schedule, and as of March 2026 is
beginning the next audit cycle of 2025 activities. The audit tool has been
Page 21 of 25

--- Page 62 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
improved to capture additional detail on "n/a" responses to clarify for
future reviewers why a given performance metric was not applicable for
that particular sample. Additionally, staff training has occurred for all
SPA auditors to ensure relevant responses are captured instead of “n/a”
responses.
Page 22 of 25

--- Page 63 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Information System Security and Controls
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 10 related
to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article,
Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject
to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the
State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the
following finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with
MDH’s response, have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 23 of 25

--- Page 64 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 11
MCPA did not ensure that vendor employees obtained criminal background
checks, as required by the contracts.
We recommend that MCPA
a. ensure that all required criminal background checks are obtained and
reviewed, including those noted above; and
b. take appropriate action for any individual identified as having a criminal
conviction.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide MCPA is operating in compliance with the Contract requirements
additional comments as around background checks. According to the contract, provision 3.3.2
deemed necessary. Criminal Background Check requires the contractor to obtain from
each prospective employee a signed statement permitting a criminal
background check. The contract monitor is only responsible for
reviewing disclosed criminal background findings and providing written
approval prior to assignment of contractor personnel with criminal
records, which has not yet happened but a process has been established
to handle.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MCPA has taken corrective action to ensure full compliance with
corrective action or contractual screening requirements. MCPA worked directly with
explain disagreement. vendors to reinforce the requirement that all employees assigned to
Medicaid projects undergo the required criminal background checks
prior to onboarding. The vendor is now required to submit background
check documentation to MCPA for review before any staff begin work.
MCPA will review all identified criminal convictions, assess associated
risks, and determine appropriate next steps in accordance with
established.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of There has been no individual identified with a criminal conviction. If
corrective action or there were to ever be an individual identified with a criminal conviction,
explain disagreement. that individual would be ineligible for work that requires access to PII
and PHI.
Page 24 of 25

--- Page 65 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Reconciliation of MMIS II to State Accounting Records
Finding 12
MCPA did not have procedures to reconcile Medicaid expenditures recorded
in MMIS II with the State’s accounting records and could not readily explain
$200.9 million in expenditures that were not recorded in MMIS II.
We recommend that MCPA establish procedures to periodically (at least
annually) reconcile financial activity recorded in MMIS II and the State’s
accounting records and resolve any variances, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide We agree with the finding related to the results of our initial Medicaid
additional comments as Management Information System (MMIS) - Financial Management
deemed necessary. Information Systems (FMIS) reconciliation. The previously submitted
reconciliation was at the program level. We have subsequently
developed an enhanced reconciliation at the transaction level which
allows us to capture and identify all transactions. Further, 99% of the
$200 million has been accounted for and reconciled.
Recommendation 12 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The previously submitted reconciliation was performed at the program
corrective action or level. We have implemented and documented a new methodology that
explain disagreement. utilizes transaction-level matching across the MMIS and FMIS systems.
Using this methodology, the FY23 and FY24 reconciliation results show
a 99.80% ($13.3B) and 99.96% ($15.1B) match. The remaining amounts
for FY23 (.20% and $27M) and FY24 (.04% and $6M) represent:
● Transactions that could not be processed in the Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) due to provider data
entry issues (e.g., provider name and address updates). MCPA is
actively correcting these records and resubmitting the
transactions for payment.
● Transactions which were withheld in MMIS to offset provider
liabilities (i.e. balances owed to Maryland Department of Health
(MDH). As a result, these payments were correctly not
transmitted to FMIS because a provider liability remained.
Page 25 of 25

--- Page 66 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Senior Auditors
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Charlotte M.S. Chamberlin
Chau D. Mai
John E. Rooney
Zoe D. Smith
Garrett A. White
Staff Auditors
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditor