Title: Baltimore City Community College
Date: 2026-05-29
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a203bc94a76b243ff577da8
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:06:54.796368
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Baltimore City Community College
May 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 29, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Baltimore City Community
College (BCCC) for the period beginning December 1, 2020 and ending June 30,
2025. BCCC is an urban two-year institution that primarily offers associate of
arts degrees and certificate programs in the business and health services fields, as
well as general studies for the purpose of continuing education at a four-year
institution.
Our audit disclosed BCCC did not document critical aspects of procurements of
goods/services, did not obtain certain required approvals, and did not publish
contract awards as required. In addition, BCCC did not have comprehensive
procedures for participating in Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing
Agreements. BCCC also paid $485,000 for goods and licenses between June
2022 and June 2023 that remained unused as of December 2025 and did not
ensure that amounts paid were consistent with the contract and supported.
Furthermore, BCCC did not consolidate procurements from two vendors totaling
approximately $638,000 circumventing oversight and transparency requirements
and its leverage as a high-volume purchaser.
Our audit also disclosed that BCCC was unable to support the propriety of
accrued federal fund revenue entries totaling $1.4 million which BCCC
management advised may not be recoverable. BCCC also did not establish
sufficient controls over significant aspects of the financial aid award processes
and did not take appropriate action when it identified suspected fictitious students
enrolled to obtain financial aid. BCCC awarded approximately $264,000 in
financial aid to 145 of these suspected fictitious students.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit further noted that BCCC did not establish adequate controls over its
payroll resulting in unsupported and miscalculated leave payouts and employees
remaining on payroll for months after their termination. BCCC also did not have
adequate accountability and control over collections and did not take sufficient
action when it identified missing collections resulting in the failure to identify,
investigate, and pursue an additional $23,000 in missing funds. In addition,
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over corporate purchasing card
activity.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, we received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that
BCCC has written off several million dollars’ worth of inventory without a proper
investigation. Based on our review, we were able to substantiate certain aspects
of the allegation and identified deficiencies with BCCC’s procedures and controls
over equipment.
Many of the aforementioned conditions were identified but not corrected in one or
more prior audits. Accordingly, we determined that BCCC’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the number and significance of the audit findings, the
number of repeat findings and wide range of BCCC operations impacted by the
findings.
BCCC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of BCCC’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings. In accordance with State law, we
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations and will notify BCCC of any needed clarification to ensure
the responses sufficiently address the related findings.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
BCCC.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Agency Responsibilities 8
Financial Statement Audits 9
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Unsatisfactory Accountability and Compliance Level 11
Findings and Recommendations 12
Procurements and Disbursements
* Finding 1 – The Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) did not 12
document critical aspects of procurements including the justification
for not using a competitive procurement, did not obtain certain
required approvals, and did not publish contract awards, as required.
Finding 2 – BCCC did not have comprehensive procedures for 14
participating in Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing
Agreements.
* Finding 3 – BCCC paid for equipment and services that were not 15
needed and did not ensure that amounts paid were consistent with
the contract and properly supported.
* Finding 4 – BCCC did not consolidate procurements from two vendors 16
totaling approximately $638,000 circumventing oversight and
transparency requirements and its leverage as a high-volume
purchaser.
Year-End Closing Entries
Finding 5 – BCCC could not provide documentation to support the 17
propriety of accrued federal fund revenue entries totaling $1.4 million
which BCCC management advised may not be recoverable.
Student Financial Aid
* Finding 6 – BCCC had not established sufficient controls over 18
significant aspects of the financial aid award and record keeping
processes.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 7 – BCCC did not take appropriate action when it identified 19
suspected fictitious students attempting to obtain financial aid, and
awarded and distributed aid to certain of these students without
proper verifications.
Payroll
* Finding 8 – BCCC did not establish adequate procedures and controls to 21
ensure the propriety of payroll transactions resulting in certain
transactions that were unsupported or improper.
Cash Receipts
Finding 9 – BCCC did not have adequate accountability and control 23
over certain collections.
Finding 10 – BCCC did not take sufficient action when it identified 24
missing collections resulting in the failure to identify, investigate, and
pursue an additional $23,000 in missing funds.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 11 – BCCC did not have adequate controls over corporate 25
purchasing card activity.
Information Systems Security and Controls
Finding 12 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 27
Finding 13 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 27
Finding 14 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 27
Finding 15 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 27
Equipment
* Finding 16 – BCCC did not conduct required physical inventories of its 27
equipment and wrote off missing equipment valued at approximately
$20.1 million without performing an investigation or obtaining
approval from the Department of General Services, as required.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 29
Agency Response Appendix
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) is an urban two-year institution
and operates under the jurisdiction of BCCC’s Board of Trustees. BCCC
primarily offers associate degrees and certificate programs across the areas of
behavioral and social sciences, pre-health professions, business, visual and
performing arts, and STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics).
The degrees and certificates offered allow students to graduate and enter the
workforce as well as continue their education at four-year institutions.
BCCC’s reported full-time equivalent enrollment for credit courses in the spring
2025 semester was 855. According to the State’s accounting records, BCCC’s
fiscal year 2025 revenues totaled approximately $83.2 million (see Figure 1),
which included a State General Fund appropriation of approximately $48.3
million. During the period from June 30, 2021 through June 30, 2025, BCCC had
vacancy rates that ranged from 27.5 percent to 32.7 percent. As of June 30, 2025,
30.7 percent of the total 437 positions were vacant. These vacancies may have
contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
BCCC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 303
Vacant 134
Total 437
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $39,459,431
Technical and Special Fees 9,394,406
Operating Expenses 34,307,084
Total $83,160,921
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
Unrestricted1 $61,501,942
Restricted2 21,658,979
Total $83,160,921
Source: State financial and personnel records
Financial Statement Audits
BCCC engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements and those of its associated foundation, for the fiscal years ended June
30, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that
BCCC’s and its foundation’s (referred to as “discretely presented component
unit”) financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the respective
financial position of BCCC and the respective changes in financial position and,
where applicable, cash flows thereof for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
1 Includes the State General Fund appropriation, tuition and fees, and other sources such as
Auxiliary Services and Educational Activities.
2 Includes federal and state grants, contracts, and other gifts.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that BCCC
had written off several million dollars in inventory without a proper investigation.
Based on our review, we were able to substantiate certain aspects of the
allegations and identified deficiencies with BCCC’s procedures and controls over
equipment as further described in Finding 16. Our review did not identify any
matters that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal
Division.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 9, 2022. See Figure 2 for the results
of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 1 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over
Repeated
Finding 2 significant aspects of the financial aid award and record
(Current Finding 6)
keeping processes within the financial aid office.
BCCC was unable to provide adequate documentation to
support a payroll adjustment increasing a senior BCCC
Repeated
Finding 3 management employee’s compensation by $72,700. In
(Current Finding 8)
addition, BCCC overpaid another employee $8,900 due
to an undetected adjustment miscalculation.
3 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
have been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
BCCC did not always adhere to State procurement
regulations regarding conducting competitive
Repeated
solicitations, obtaining Board of Public Works approval
Finding 4 (Current Findings 1
of contracts, and the publication of bid solicitations and
3, and 4)
awards. In addition, contract invoices were not always
adequately verified prior to payment.
During our audit period, BCCC did not comply with
State law and Department of Information Technology
Finding 5 Not repeated
policies for the procurement and monitoring of its two
resource sharing agreements.
Finding 6 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.4 Status Redacted4
Finding 7 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.4 Status Redacted4
BCCC did not conduct physical inventories of equipment
Repeated
Finding 8 and did not maintain complete equipment records as
(Current Finding 16)
required.
Unsatisfactory Accountability and Compliance Level
We determined that BCCC’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory in accordance with the rating system we established in conformity
with State Government Article, Section 2-1221, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. The rating was established for the purpose of determining an overall
evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability and compliance with State laws
and regulations and is not a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
The unsatisfactory rating was made pursuant to the aforementioned law and rating
guidelines approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee. The primary
factors contributing to the unsatisfactory rating were the number and significance
of our audit findings, including the number of findings repeated from our
preceding audit report.
4 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
have been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements and Disbursements
Background
Chapter 732, Laws of Maryland 2021, effective July 1, 2021 exempts the
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) from most provisions of State
procurement law and from State oversight of its (1) information technology (IT)
policies, standards, and procurement and (2) capital improvement and service
contracts valued at $500,000 or less. The law further provides that, subject to
review and approval of the Board of Public Works (BPW) and the Joint
Committee on Administrative, Executive, and Legislative Review, BCCC develop
policies and procedures governing its procurement that promote the purposes of
State procurement law. BCCC developed Procurement Policies and Procedures
which were approved by the BPW on July 6, 2022.
According to BCCC’s records, during our audit period, 46 contracts totaling
approximately $14.2 million were procured competitively and 566 contracts
totaling $17.5 million were procured non-competitively. In addition, BCCC
participated in 118 Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements
(ICPAs) to obtain contracts totaling approximately $14.2 million.
Finding 1
BCCC did not document critical aspects of procurements including the
justification for not using a competitive procurement, did not obtain certain
required approvals, and did not publish contract awards, as required.
Analysis
BCCC did not document critical aspects of procurements including the
justification for not using a competitive procurement, did not obtain certain
required approvals, and did not publish contract awards, as required. We
reviewed 10 procurements (5 competitive procurements totaling approximately
$3.8 million and 5 non-competitive procurements totaling $860,000), and 9
contract modifications totaling $2.2 million.5
 BCCC could not provide certain required documentation to support the
propriety of the 5 competitive procurements tested. For example, BCCC
could not support the propriety of the evaluation results for 1 competitive
procurement of architectural and engineering services totaling $1.5 million.
5 These procurements and contract modifications tested were initiated between September 2021
and April 2025 and were selected for review based on materiality.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Specifically, BCCC could not provide any documented evaluation criteria,
and the summary of evaluations did not agree with the individual evaluations.
While each evaluation committee member separately ranked the bidders for
this contract, those rankings were not accurately reflected on the summary
used to justify the award. Our review disclosed that the discrepancies did not
change the overall award decision.
 BCCC’s sole source justifications for 4 of the 5 non-competitive procurements
tested totaling $750,000 were not adequately documented. For example, the
justification for a $263,000 sole source contract for hospitality training
indicated that other vendors could provide the services but the vendor was
procured without competition because of restrictions from the funding source.
However, BCCC could not provide documentation to support the restriction.
 BCCC did not execute formal written agreements for 2 of the procurements
tested totaling $102,000 and $263,000, respectively. As a result, there was no
documentation of payment terms and the specific deliverables to enable
effective monitoring of the services and the propriety of the related payments,
as further detailed in Finding 3.
 BCCC did not obtain required approvals for 2 contract modifications tested
and did not process a formal contract modification for an increase in a third
contract’s value. Our test of 9 modifications disclosed that BCCC executed a
$324,000 modification for a renewal option without BPW approval and a
$93,000 modification for a different contract (doubling the value of the
contract) without BCCC Board of Trustees approval. For another $218,000
modification, while it was referenced in documentation submitted to the BPW,
BCCC did not execute a written contract modification detailing the scope of
work to be provided for the increase in contract cost.
 BCCC did not publish the 10 contract awards tested on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA). Publishing awards provides transparency
over State procurements including information about winning bidders and the
amount of the related award.
BCCC’s Procurement Policies and Procedures require documentation of
proposals including evidence that proposals meet solicitation requirements and a
summary of findings from the evaluation committee, and that the non-competitive
procurement process be used only when a single source exists. The Policies and
Procedures further require BPW approval of modifications of $50,000 or more
and Board of Trustees approval for modifications that increase a contract’s total
value in excess of $100,000 and that such modifications be in writing. Finally,
13

--- Page 16 ---
State law provides that the award of contracts of $100,000 or more procured by
public institutions are to be published on eMMA.6
Similar conditions regarding maintaining required documentation to support the
propriety of procurements, obtaining required approvals, and publishing contract
awards were included in our prior audit report. In response to our report, BCCC
indicated that by June 2022 required procurement documentation would be
maintained, contracts would receive proper independent approval, and when
applicable, awards would be published. BCCC could not explain why the
recommendations were not implemented.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCCC comply with State law and its Procurement
Policies and Procedures and
a. maintain required documentation to support the propriety of competitive
procurements (repeat);
b. competitively procure contracts unless there is only a single vendor that
can meet the requirements;
c. prepare sufficiently documented sole source justifications, written
contracts, and contract modifications;
d. obtain required approvals for contract modifications, including those
noted above (repeat); and
e. ensure contract awards are published on eMMA, as required, including
those noted above (repeat).
Finding 2
BCCC did not have comprehensive procedures for participating in ICPAs.
Analysis
BCCC did not have comprehensive procedures for participating in ICPAs.
Specifically, BCCC procedures did not include steps to ensure that participating
in an ICPA was in the best interest of the State, did not require a review of the
procurement method used for the ICPA, and did not require verification that the
rates on the BCCC contract were consistent with those on the ICPA. These
requirements are recommended best practices at other Maryland
colleges/universities.
6 Effective July 1, 2024, the threshold for publishing on eMMA increased from $50,000 to
$100,000.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our review of three contracts7 totaling $4.5 million procured under ICPAs
disclosed that for all three contracts tested, BCCC did not document that the use
of the ICPA promoted efficiency and savings and did not verify that the rates on
its contract agreed with the original ICPA. In addition, for one of these contracts
totaling $475,500, BCCC did not ensure that the ICPA was procured using an
appropriate procurement process. As a result, there is a lack of assurance that
these contracts were in the State’s best interest.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCCC establish procedures to ensure its use of ICPAs
promotes efficiency and savings, are procured using an appropriate method,
and that rates agree with the original contracts.
Finding 3
BCCC paid for equipment and services that were not needed and did not
ensure that amounts paid were consistent with the contract and properly
supported.
Analysis
BCCC paid for equipment and services that were not needed and did not ensure
that amounts paid were consistent with the contract and properly supported. Our
review of 22 invoices8 totaling $5.2 million received from nine vendors during the
period from January 2022 through June 2025 disclosed the following.
 BCCC paid invoices for electronic equipment (such as surveillance cameras,
door access controllers, and related licenses) totaling $508,000 that remained
unused as of the date of our test which in some cases was up to three years
after they were purchased. For example, BCCC purchased 96 door access
controllers totaling $156,000 between June 2022 and June 2023, and 312 door
access controller licenses totaling $329,000 in June 2022, all of which
remained unused as of December 2025.
BCCC also did not ensure the rates paid for these goods were accurate and
consistent with the related contract9 resulting in overpayments totaling
$100,000 and underpayments totaling $58,000 going undetected. For
example, one invoice included a rate of $915 per door access controller when
7 These contracts were initiated between February 2022 and April 2024 and were selected for
review based on materiality.
8 Our initial test was of 12 material invoices of which 2 invoices were from the vendor commented
upon in the first bullet of this finding. Based on concerns with the initial 2 invoices from this
vendor, we selected 10 additional material invoices from this vendor for testing.
9 This was one of the three ICPA contracts noted in finding 2.
15

--- Page 18 ---
the contract provided for a rate of $700, resulting in net overpayments of
$42,000.
 BCCC paid for services that were not included in the related contracts.
Specifically, for 2 invoices tested, BCCC paid $93,000 for transportation and
training when these services and the related rates were not included in the
contract.
 BCCC could not provide support for 1 invoice totaling $34,000 for labor
charges on an enterprise resource planning contract. The lack of
documentation is significant because labor charges accounted for
approximately 50 percent of the total $6.9 million contract.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of verification of the accuracy of invoice
charges to the contractual rates and to supporting documentation were included in
our prior audit report. In response to the report, BCCC indicated that by January
2022 it would validate invoice payments to contracts prior to payment and require
additional evidence to support invoices, such as timecards and proof of
performance. As noted above, BCCC did not implement these steps to ensure that
amounts paid were proper.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCCC
a. only purchase goods and services that are actually needed and determine
the feasibility of returning or obtaining a credit for the unused items
noted above;
b. verify the accuracy of invoice charges to the contract rates and to
supporting documentation such as, time records (repeat);
c. ensure all goods and services billed for are included in the contract; and
d. take appropriate action to resolve the aforementioned improper
payments.
Finding 4
BCCC did not consolidate procurements from two vendors totaling
approximately $638,000 circumventing oversight and transparency
requirements and its leverage as a high-volume purchaser.
Analysis
BCCC did not consolidate procurements of certain goods and services
circumventing oversight and transparency requirements and its leverage as a high-
volume purchaser. Our analysis of purchasing activity totaling approximately $5
16

--- Page 19 ---
million during the period from December 1, 2020 through June 30, 2025 disclosed
that BCCC made 263 purchases from two vendors totaling approximately
$638,000 without a formal competitive procurement process.
For example, BCCC made 189 payments totaling $280,000 to one vendor each
less than $2,500, for a rental truck used in its workforce development courses.
Since the purchases were not consolidated, BCCC circumvented certain
competitive procurement and approval requirements, such as publishing of
solicitation and award, and obtaining Board of Trustees approval, and did not
maximize its benefits as a high-volume purchaser.
BCCC’s Procurement Policies and Procedures require that the acquisition of
goods and services should be procured by applying the best methods and business
practices which provide for public confidence in the College. In addition, the
policy generally requires formal written competitive procurement and publication
of the solicitation for procurements exceeding $25,000 and requires at least two
written bids for procurements exceeding $5,000. The Policy further requires
Board of Trustees approval for contracts that exceed $100,000.
A similar condition regarding not consolidating procurements to maximize the
State’s purchasing power was included in our prior report. In response to that
report BCCC stated that by June 30, 2022 it would review purchasing practices to
determine which contracts to consolidate. During our current audit, BCCC could
not explain why the recommendation was not implemented.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCCC consolidate procurements of similar goods and
services to maximize purchasing power and to comply with requirements for
competition, increased transparency, oversight, and control (repeat).
Year-End Closing Entries
Finding 5
BCCC could not provide documentation to support the propriety of accrued
federal fund revenue entries totaling $1.4 million which BCCC management
advised may not be recoverable.
Analysis
BCCC could not provide documentation to support the propriety of accrued
federal fund revenue entries totaling $1.4 million which BCCC management
advised may not be recoverable. At the end of fiscal year 2025, BCCC recorded
17

--- Page 20 ---
85 accrued federal fund revenue entries totaling $27.2 million, including 32
positive accrued revenue entries (recording a receivable for anticipated future
funds due) totaling $10.9 million and 53 negative accrued revenue entries
(deferred revenue) totaling $16.3 million.
Our test of 6 of the 32 positive accrued revenue entries totaling approximately
$8.4 million disclosed that BCCC could not document that two entries totaling
$1.4 million accurately reflected amounts collectable from the federal government
for COVID grants. As of December 2025, BCCC had not requested or received
any of the federal funds. BCCC indicated that these funds appear to be
uncollectable and plans to use its unrestricted revenue fund, which may include
State general funds, to cover any related deficits.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s (GAD) year-end
closing instructions provide that these entries should reflect amounts that are
collectable within 60 days of the end of the fiscal year and that revenue should be
recognized in the same fiscal year the expenditure is made. The closing
instructions also require that detailed documentation to support the entries be
maintained.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCCC
a. ensure that all accrued federal fund revenue entries are properly
supported, as required by GAD policies; and
b. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable to GAD,
including those noted above, and work with the Department of Budget
and Management to resolve any related deficits.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 6
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over significant aspects of the
financial aid award and record keeping processes.
Analysis
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over significant aspects of the
financial aid award and record keeping processes. Specifically, BCCC did not
conduct independent supervisory reviews of manual adjustments to financial aid
awards. In addition, BCCC did not conduct independent supervisory reviews of
required verifications of financial aid application data and satisfactory academic
progress by financial aid recipients, performed by financial aid office staff. As a
18

--- Page 21 ---
result, there was a lack of assurance that these adjustments and verifications were
properly performed and documented. Our test of financial aid awards, manual
adjustments, and verifications did not disclose any material deficiencies.
The accuracy and validity of these processes are required to ensure the propriety
of student financial aid awards, which during academic year 2024-2025 totaled
approximately $11.6 million. Of this amount, approximately $5.9 million were
awards manually input into the financial aid system10 and not subject to
independent supervisory review and approval. Higher education institutions are
required to verify information provided on certain financial aid applications to
ensure students qualify for any aid awarded.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, BCCC advised that it hired a contractor to implement
supervisory reviews of manual adjustments to financial aid awards and to ensure
that satisfactory academic progress was achieved. Although BCCC procured a
consulting services contract for its new financial aid system in September 2021,
the scope of the contract did not include supervisory reviews of financial aid
manual adjustments, application data, and satisfactory academic progress.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCCC ensure that manual adjustments to financial aid
awards, as well as required verifications of financial aid application data and
satisfactory academic progress by financial aid recipients are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval (repeat).
Finding 7
BCCC did not take appropriate action when it identified suspected fictitious
students attempting to obtain financial aid, and awarded and distributed aid
to certain of these students without proper verifications.
Analysis
BCCC did not take appropriate action when it identified suspected fictitious
students that applied for admission, and awarded and distributed federal financial
aid (FFA) to certain of these students without proper verifications. National
media have reported instances of fictitious or “ghost” students enrolled in post-
secondary institutions across multiple states. This often involves AI-powered
bots that mass-apply to colleges, create fake accounts, and submit fake
10 BCCC implemented a new financial aid system to process and track financial aid in August
2022.
19

--- Page 22 ---
assignments to maintain the illusion of enrollment long enough to receive
financial aid refunds.
Beginning in May 2024, BCCC identified potentially fictitious students who
applied to BCCC. For example, BCCC identified students registered for the same
courses multiple times, registered for multiple courses that did not require
prerequisites, or that had no prior test history. Our review disclosed that BCCC
flagged the suspicious students for further verifications but the flag did not
preclude the students from receiving federal and State aid pending the
verification.
Our analysis of the 4,394 accounts flagged for further verification as of November
2025, disclosed that BCCC could not provide any documentation of follow-up
actions to verify the propriety of the accounts. Furthermore, during fiscal year
2025, BCCC awarded $264,392 in FFA to 145 of these students of which
$165,043 was disbursed directly to the student. BCCC was unaware that it had
awarded and disbursed these funds until we brought it to their attention. BCCC
may be responsible for reimbursing the federal government for any improperly
awarded aid.
BCCC also included these potential fictitious students in full-time equivalent
student calculations reported to the Maryland Higher Education Commission
(MHEC) for funding purposes. Based on our review during fiscal years 2024 and
2025, BCCC requested $635,915 for these students and received $126,901 in
funding as of February 2026. BCCC may be responsible for reimbursing MHEC
for any funding awarded on behalf of students that are determined to be fictitious.
Federal regulations require that schools have a system to resolve conflicting
information pertaining to eligibility in student accounts prior to disbursing FFA.
Additionally, schools must notify and provide supporting documentation to the
federal Department of Education, Office of the Inspector General (DOE OIG)
when accounts are suspected to be fraudulent. As of January 2026, BCCC has not
referred any accounts to DOE OIG.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCCC
a. take appropriate action when it identifies suspected fictitious students,
including those noted above;
b. in conjunction with the Office of Attorney General determine if funding
needs to be returned to the federal DOE and MHEC; and
c. refer suspected fictitious students, including those noted above, to
appropriate authorities in accordance with federal regulations.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Payroll
Finding 8
BCCC did not establish adequate procedures and controls to ensure the
propriety of payroll transactions resulting in certain transactions that were
unsupported or improper.
Analysis
BCCC did not establish adequate procedures and controls to ensure the propriety
of payroll transactions. According to State records, during fiscal year 2025,
BCCC’s payroll expenditures totaled approximately $39.5 million on behalf of
437 regular and 189 contractual authorized employees. During this period, BCCC
processed 526 employee additions and 475 rate changes.
 Our test of 10 employee additions and rate changes11 processed between July
2021 and April 2025 disclosed that 3 rate changes totaling $22,500 did not
have documentation, such as appointment letters to support the change. In
addition, our test of 12 leave payouts totaling $248,00011 processed between
February 2021 and September 2025 disclosed that BCCC did not have
adequate documentation to support 2 payouts totaling $59,000; paid $3,300
for 2 accrued leave payouts in excess of the maximum hours allowed by State
regulations; and underpaid $2,300 to an employee due to an incorrect rate.
These conditions were caused, at least in part, because BCCC did not have
comprehensive procedures for processing and approving payroll adjustments.
 BCCC did not ensure that employees who left State service were timely
removed from the payroll. According to State records, during the period from
December 1, 2020 to June 30, 2025, there were 1,455 employees who
separated from BCCC of which 897 were not removed from the State Payroll
System (SPS) for at least 14 days after their separation. Our review of State
records disclosed that 71 of these employees were paid in pay periods after
their separation.12 We reviewed 15 of these employees whose final payroll
was between 17 days and 1,526 days (50 months) after the effective date of
their termination and noted that 5 received regular payroll payments totaling
approximately $29,000 subsequent to their termination date. BCCC could not
readily justify these payments.
 BCCC did not ensure that timesheets were prepared, submitted and approved
as required by BCCC’s policy. For example, our arbitrary review of BCCC’s
11 We selected these test items based on risk and materiality.
12 We excluded payments for leave payments, instead focusing on regular gross payments and
other earnings for contractual employees who are ineligible to receive leave payouts.
21

--- Page 24 ---
payroll system for the pay periods ending from April 15, 2025 through May
13, 2025 disclosed that 354 of the 1,317 timesheets were either not prepared,
submitted, or approved in BCCC’s payroll information system, as of
November 2025. This included 153 contractual employees that received
payments totaling approximately $75,000. Although contractual employees
are only paid if they prepare a timesheet, we were advised by BCCC
management that supervisors prepared manual forms of hours worked for
these contractual employees which were not recorded in the payroll system or
certified for accuracy by the employee. BCCC’s policies require timely
submission and approval of employee time and leave.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of formal procedures governing criteria,
documentation, and approvals needed for payroll adjustments, and payroll
miscalculations were included in our prior audit report. Although BCCC
indicated in its response and additional correspondence that procedures had been
established (including a requirement that supervisors recalculate the adjustments),
these procedures were not formalized in writing and as indicated by the above
testing, not consistently implemented.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCCC
a. develop formal procedures governing the criteria, documentation, and
approvals (such as Board of Trustees) needed for adjustments (repeat);
b. ensure that all payroll adjustments are supported with adequate
documentation and properly calculated (repeat), including those noted
above, and recover any amounts that are determined to be improper;
c. ensure employees are timely removed from the payroll upon separation,
investigate any payments to employees after termination and recover any
amounts determined to be improper, including those noted above; and
d. ensure all timesheets are submitted and approved, as required, including
those noted above.
Cash Receipts
Background
BCCC collects payments for tuition, fees, charitable contributions, and grant
awards. According to BCCC’s records, during fiscal year 2025, collections
totaled approximately $21.4 million, including $17 million in electronic
collections, such as credit card receipts and wire transfers, and $4.4 million in
checks and cash received by mail and at BCCC’s cash registers.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 9
BCCC did not have adequate accountability and control over certain
collections.
Analysis
BCCC did not establish adequate accountability and control over certain
collections. We reviewed procedures and controls over mail and cash register
collections and tested 15 arbitrarily selected deposits made between April 2024
and June 2025, totaling approximately $2.7 million.13 We also reviewed BCCC
procedures for investigating chargebacks (such as bank adjustments) and
arbitrarily tested 10 chargebacks processed between November 2021 and
December 2024, totaling approximately $1.2 million.14
 BCCC could not provide documentation of the initial recordation for mailed
checks totaling $2.5 million, included in 9 of the deposits tested.
 BCCC did not adequately secure collections prior to deposit. On multiple
occasions, we observed that BCCC did not lock the safe where collections
were maintained. As a result, 7 BCCC employees had unrestricted access to
the collections.
 BCCC did not document the transfer of funds to its bank courier to establish
accountability over the funds. Specifically, BCCC did not directly supervise
the transfer or sign a transfer log to acknowledge the chain of custody.
Instead, the log was pre-signed by BCCC cashiers and only signed by the
courier when funds were collected.
 BCCC could not document a deposit verification was performed for all of the
deposits tested, totaling $2.7 million. Our test of these deposits disclosed that
transactions recorded in the cashiering system agreed with the related bank
records.
 BCCC could not document that it investigated 9 of the bank adjustments
tested which reduced the amount of the deposit by a total of $196,200.
Rather, BCCC wrote these adjustments off as bad debt without obtaining
supporting documentation or explanations. As a result, we could not readily
determine the propriety of the transactions.
13 We focused our review on collections received through the mail and at the cash registers
because they were at a higher risk.
14 We focused our review on significant chargebacks and those referencing physical deposits.
23

--- Page 26 ---
The Comptroller of Maryland General Accounting Division’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires agencies to immediately record collections upon
receipt, safeguard cash receipts until deposit, and independently reconcile
collections to bank records using initial source documents and investigate any
differences.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BCCC establish adequate accountability and control
over collections in accordance with the Comptroller of Maryland General
Accounting Division’s Accounting Procedures Manual. Specifically, we
recommend that BCCC
a. record mail collections immediately upon receipt;
b. ensure collections are properly secured prior to deposit;
c. document the transfer of funds to the bank courier;
d. perform an independent documented verification to ensure all collections
received were deposited; and
e. conduct documented investigations of all chargebacks, including those
noted above, and take appropriate corrective action.
Finding 10
BCCC did not take sufficient action when it identified missing collections
resulting in the failure to identify, investigate, and pursue an additional
$23,000 in missing funds.
Analysis
BCCC did not take sufficient action when it identified missing collections
resulting in the failure to identify, investigate, and pursue additional missing
funds. During our audit, BCCC management notified us that it identified $7,220
missing from the July 9, 2024 collections. Our review disclosed that although
BCCC investigated the missing funds, the investigation was not adequately
documented or comprehensive. Specifically, BCCC did not document the
investigation methodology, the time period reviewed, and the control deficiencies
that enabled the missing collections to go undetected (including the conditions
noted above in Finding 8).
BCCC also did not document any attempts to identify other missing collections.
In this regard, we reviewed State and BCCC’s records for the period January 2023
through June 2025 and identified six additional days with missing collections
totaling $23,000. These collections were recorded in BCCC’s internal collection
log and the State’s accounting records but were not deposited. The State
Treasurer’s Office notified BCCC of the discrepancy between the recorded
24

--- Page 27 ---
deposits and the bank records, but as noted in Finding 9, BCCC did not
investigate bank adjustments or take any other corrective action.
We further noted that BCCC did not refer this matter to the Governor’s Chief
Legal Counsel as required. Rather, BCCC only referred the $7,220 in missing
collections it identified to the Office of the Attorney General (OAG). The
Governor’s Executive Order, Standards of Conduct for Executive Branch
Employees, requires that all departments and agencies of the State immediately
refer any instances of possible criminal or unethical conduct by an employee to
the OAG and Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BCCC
a. take sufficient actions when it becomes aware of questionable activity,
b. consult with the OAG before taking any actions related to the missing
collections noted above, and
c. ensure any future instances of possible criminal or unethical conduct are
referred to the appropriate entities in accordance with the
aforementioned Executive Order.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 11
BCCC did not have adequate controls over corporate purchasing card (CPC)
activity.
Analysis
BCCC did not establish adequate controls over CPC activity. According to
BCCC’s records, during the period from December 1, 2020 through June 30,
2025, CPC transactions totaled approximately $5 million across 29 cardholders.
Our test of 25 CPC transactions15 totaling approximately $46,000 disclosed the
following conditions:
 BCCC did not review and approve CPC activity logs, as required, for 16
transactions totaling $24,000. The total transactions not subject to review on
the 11 related CPC activity logs totaled $294,000. Our review of these
transactions disclosed that they appeared to be reasonable.
15 We selected test items based on risk and the items purchased.
25

--- Page 28 ---
 BCCC did not ensure that cardholders obtained sufficient documentation to
facilitate the above noted supervisory review, such as packing slips or
receiving reports, to support that the goods/services were received for 19
transactions totaling $35,000.
 Supervisory reviews of monthly CPC activity logs did not use available
Level-3 data to ensure the propriety of the purchases, as required. Level-3
data, which is reported by certain merchants, consists of detailed descriptions
of items purchased and provide supervisors with additional information to
help detect questionable purchases. During the period from December 1,
2020 through June 30, 2025, Level-3 data was available for 3,995 of BCCC’s
CPC transactions totaling approximately $2.4 million. Based on our review of
the Level-3 data, we did not identify any questionable purchases.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual requires agencies to perform a documented supervisory
review of monthly CPC cardholder activity logs and transactions. Such a review
is to include Level-3 data and ensure that all transactions are properly documented
with sufficient detail (such as itemized receipts and packing slips).
Recommendation 11
We recommend that BCCC comply with the aforementioned Manual and
a. perform a documented independent supervisory review for the propriety
of all CPC transactions,
b. verify goods and services paid for were received and supported, and
c. ensure supervisors use available Level-3 data as part of the monthly
review to aid in the assessment of the propriety of purchases and
payments.
Information Systems Security and Control
We have determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 12 through 15 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with BCCC’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 14
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 15
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Equipment
Finding 16
BCCC did not conduct required physical inventories of its equipment and
wrote off missing equipment valued at approximately $20.1 million without
performing an investigation or obtaining approval from the Department of
General Services (DGS), as required.
Analysis
BCCC did not conduct required physical inventories of equipment and wrote off
missing equipment without performing an investigation or obtaining approval
from DGS, as required. Specifically, BCCC only conducted one physical
inventory in June 2023 and did not reconcile the results to its inventory records.
In addition, we received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging
that BCCC had written off several million dollars of inventory without a proper
investigation. Based on our review, we were able to substantiate the allegation
but did not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the
Attorney General’s Criminal Division.
Specifically, our review disclosed that BCCC did not investigate 26,018 missing
items (including sensitive items such as laptops and computer equipment)
identified during the inventory with a value of approximately $20.1 million (72
percent of the total equipment balance as of June 2023). Rather, BCCC
management advised that after the initial attempt to locate the equipment, it did
not perform any further investigation. BCCC also removed the missing
27

--- Page 30 ---
equipment from its inventory records without obtaining DGS approval, as
required.
DGS’ Inventory Control Manual requires that physical inventories be conducted
for sensitive items annually and for non-sensitive every three years, missing
equipment is investigated, and the results reconciled to the detail records.
Furthermore, the Manual requires agencies to obtain DGS approval prior to
removing items from the inventory records.
Similar conditions regarding accountability and control over equipment have been
commented on in our two preceding audit reports dating back to November 2017.
In response to our prior report, BCCC stated that by November 2022 it would
complete a full inventory and continue to do so on an annual basis. As noted
above BCCC only performed one inventory and it was not comprehensive. We
were advised by BCCC management that insufficient staffing contributed to the
failure to implement the recommendations as intended.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that BCCC
a. conduct timely periodic documented physical inventories of equipment
(repeat);
b. ensure that the results are investigated and reconciled to the detail
inventory records (repeat); and
c. obtain DGS approval prior to removing missing items from its inventory
records, including those noted above.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Baltimore City Community
College (BCCC) for the period beginning December 1, 2020 and ending June 30,
2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine BCCC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, cash receipts, student accounts receivable, financial aid, payroll,
equipment, resource sharing agreements, information systems security and
control, and federal funds. In addition, we reviewed certain activities related to a
referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of BCCC’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including BCCC.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 1, 2020 to June 30, 2025, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of BCCC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
29

--- Page 32 ---
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data), the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity. The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposed the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from BCCC’s financial system, such as student accounts
receivable, for the purpose of selecting test items and assessing user access. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
BCCC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to BCCC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect BCCC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to BCCC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of this cybersecurity information has been redacted. We
have determined that such aforementioned practices, and government auditing
standards, support the redaction of this information from the public audit report.
The specifics of the cybersecurity findings have been communicated to BCCC
and those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations in an unredacted
audit report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that BCCC’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the number and significance of our audit findings,
including the number of findings repeated from our preceding audit report. Our
rating conclusion has been made solely pursuant to the aforementioned law and
rating guidelines approved by the Join Audit and Evaluation Committee. The
rating process is not a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
31

--- Page 34 ---
BCCC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise BCCC regarding the results of our review of its
response.
32

--- Page 35 ---
APPENDIX
BCCC
Baltimore City Community College
May 29, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen
On behalf of Baltimore City Community College, I would like to formally acknowledge the
completion of the fiscal compliance audit covering the period beginning December 30,
2020, and ending June 30, 2025.
We sincerely appreciate the professionalism, diligence, thoroughness, and time invested
by your team during the audit. Baltimore City Community College remains committed to
strengthening internal controls and ensuring accountability and integrity of our agency.
Sincerely,
Debra L. Mccurdy, PhD
President

--- Page 37 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
BCCC did not document critical aspects of procurements including the
justification for not using a competitive procurement, did not obtain certain
required approvals, and did not publish contract awards, as required.
We recommend that BCCC comply with State law and its Procurement
Policies and Procedures and
a. maintain required documentation to support the propriety of competitive
procurements (repeat);
b. competitively procure contracts unless there is only a single vendor that
can meet the requirements;
c. prepare sufficiently documented sole source justifications, written
contracts, and contract modifications;
d. obtain required approvals for contract modifications, including those
noted above (repeat); and
e. ensure contract awards are published on eMMA, as required, including
those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will implement corrective actions to ensure that all procurements
corrective action or are fully documented and maintained in accordance with policy.
explain disagreement. Specifically, BCCC is developing and enforcing a standardized
procurement file checklist that includes all required elements such as
solicitations, evaluation documentation, approvals, and award
determinations. A centralized electronic contract management and
document repository is being implemented to ensure consistent record
retention and accessibility. In addition, procurement staff and
departmental liaisons will receive mandatory training on documentation
standards and compliance expectations, and periodic internal compliance
reviews will be conducted to ensure adherence.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2026
Page 1 of 25

--- Page 38 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of BCCC will take corrective action to strengthen controls over
corrective action or the selection of procurement methods to ensure that competitive
explain disagreement. procurement is used whenever applicable. The College is implementing
a formal pre-procurement review process requiring Procurement Office
approval of the procurement method prior to solicitation or award. This
process will include validation that competition is sought unless a
properly documented and approved sole source justification
exists. Additional guidance and training will be provided to departments
to reinforce requirements for competition and to discourage
inappropriate use of non-competitive procurements. Ongoing monitoring
and supervisory review will be established to ensure compliance.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will implement corrective measures to ensure that all sole source
corrective action or procurements are properly justified and that all procurements are
explain disagreement. supported by formal written agreements. The College is revising its sole
source justification process to require detailed
documentation demonstrating that only one vendor can provide the
required goods or services, including market research, vendor
uniqueness analysis, and verification of funding source restrictions when
applicable.
These justifications will be independently reviewed and approved by
Procurement leadership prior to award. Additionally, BCCC will enforce
a strict “no contract, no service” policy requiring fully executed written
agreements before any goods or services are delivered. Standardized
contract templates will be updated to include clear scopes of work,
deliverables, performance metrics, payment terms, and compliance
clauses. The College will also require all contract modifications to be
formalized in writing, with documented scope and cost changes, and
subject to the same review and approval processes as original contracts.
Compliance checkpoints and system controls will be implemented to
prevent payment processing without an executed agreement in place.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2026
Please provide details of BCCC agrees and has enhanced its internal controls to ensure that all
corrective action or contract modifications receive the appropriate approvals prior to
explain disagreement. execution, as required by State law and institutional policy. Corrective
actions include the implementation of a contract and modification
Page 2 of 25

--- Page 39 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
tracking system that captures original contract values, cumulative
modification amounts, and applicable approval thresholds for Board of
Public Works and Board of Trustees review.
The Procurement Office will establish a formal pre-execution
compliance review to verify that all required approvals, supporting
documentation, and justifications are obtained and documented before
any modification is finalized. In addition, system-based controls will be
introduced to flag transactions that exceed established thresholds and
prevent processing without documented approvals. Training will be
provided to procurement and program staff regarding approval
requirements and escalation procedures. Periodic internal audits will be
conducted to ensure ongoing compliance, and any identified exceptions
will be reported to executive leadership and addressed through corrective
action.
Recommendation 1e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will formalize procedures to ensure consistent application of
corrective action or eMMA publication requirements based on applicable thresholds,
explain disagreement. procurement methods, and funding sources. The Office of Procurement
will integrate an eMMA posting review into the contract award and close
out process to confirm whether publication is required prior to final
execution. Management will also provide refresher training for staff
responsible for contract administration and will institute periodic
supervisory reviews to monitor compliance and reinforce consistent
practice going forward.
Page 3 of 25

--- Page 40 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
BCCC did not have comprehensive procedures for participating in ICPAs.
We recommend that BCCC establish procedures to ensure its use of ICPAs
promotes efficiency and savings, are procured using an appropriate method,
and that rates agree with the original contracts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will formalize and implement written procedures requiring
corrective action or documented analyses confirming that use of an ICPA is in the College’s
explain disagreement. best interest, that the cooperative agreement was competitively procured
by the originating entity, and that pricing and terms are consistent with
the original contract. These requirements will be incorporated into
procurement review processes and staff guidance to strengthen
oversight, consistency, and documentation of ICPA participation going
forward.
A formal reconciliation process is being developed to ensure all
payments agree with the original contract terms.
These requirements will be incorporated into procurement checklists,
internal guidance, and review protocols consistent with Section 4.5 of
the Procurement Policies and Procedures.
Page 4 of 25

--- Page 41 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
BCCC paid for equipment and services that were not needed and did not
ensure that amounts paid were consistent with the contract and properly
supported.
We recommend that BCCC
a. only purchase goods and services that are actually needed and determine
the feasibility of returning or obtaining a credit for the unused items
noted above;
b. verify the accuracy of invoice charges to the contract rates and to
supporting documentation such as, time records (repeat);
c. ensure all goods and services billed for are included in the contract; and
d. take appropriate action to resolve the aforementioned improper
payments.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will strengthen pre-purchase planning, approvals, and
corrective action or coordination between Procurement, Information Technology, Facilities,
explain disagreement. and user departments to ensure that purchases align with current
implementation schedules and operational needs. Management will
evaluate unused equipment and licenses identified in the audit
to determine whether returns, credits, redeployment, or contract
amendments are feasible. Going forward, purchases of technology and
related licenses will be phased, where practicable, to better align
acquisition timing with deployment readiness.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 08/31/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will implement mandatory contract management and
corrective action or invoice-review training for all departments involved in procurement,
explain disagreement. contract administration, and invoice approval. The training will
emphasize departmental responsibilities for validating invoice charges
against contract terms, approved rate schedules, and required supporting
documentation, such as time records and proof of performance, prior to
approval for payment.
Page 5 of 25

--- Page 42 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
A formal reconciliation process is being developed to ensure all
payments agree with the original contract terms.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2027
Please provide details of BCCC will strengthen contract administration and invoice approval
corrective action or controls to ensure that only goods and services expressly authorized in
explain disagreement. executed contracts or approved contract modifications are paid. Prior to
invoice approval, departments and contract administrators will be
required to confirm that all invoiced line items—including labor
categories, rates, quantities, licenses, training, transportation, and
ancillary services—are clearly reflected in the governing contract
documents.
To support this requirement, BCCC will enhance contract review
procedures to ensure that scopes of work, pricing schedules, optional
services, and allowable reimbursable costs are clearly defined at the time
of contract execution. In instances where services or charges are not
included in the original contract, payments will not be approved until a
formally executed contract modification or amendment is completed and
properly approved in accordance with delegated authority.
As part of the inventory and property records initiative, the process of
receiving goods and services will be strengthened to reconcile against
the original contract. A formal checklist will be implemented to ensure
compliance.
Additionally, Procurement and Finance will collaborate to implement
standardized invoice-to-contract reconciliation tools and review
checklists. These tools require documented confirmation that charges are
contractually authorized before payment and will be used consistently
across departments to promote compliance and accountability.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will take appropriate corrective action to identify, document, and
corrective action or resolve all overpayments and underpayments identified in the audit. This
explain disagreement. will include contacting vendors to pursue refunds, credits, or billing
adjustments, as well as reconciling underpayments through corrected
invoicing or contractual amendments where warranted. All actions taken
to resolve payment discrepancies will be formally documented and
retained in the contract and payment records.
Page 6 of 25

--- Page 43 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
BCCC did not consolidate procurements from two vendors totaling
approximately $638,000 circumventing oversight and transparency
requirements and its leverage as a high-volume purchaser.
We recommend that BCCC consolidate procurements of similar goods and
services to maximize purchasing power and to comply with requirements for
competition, increased transparency, oversight, and control (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will implement a comprehensive corrective action plan designed
corrective action or to ensure that procurements of similar goods and services are
explain disagreement. effectively consolidated to maximize purchasing power and comply
with all applicable requirements. As part of this effort, BCCC
is establishing a centralized spend monitoring process that includes the
development of quarterly spend analysis reports and vendor spend
aggregation reports to identify high-frequency vendors and opportunities
for consolidation. A formal Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for
spend monitoring and vendor analysis is being implemented to guide
consistent review and decision-making.
In addition, BCCC is advancing vendor consolidation and competitive
procurement initiatives by identifying high-volume vendors suitable for
consolidation and conducting formal competitive procurements (e.g.,
RFPs and IFBs) to establish contracts or blanket purchase agreements.
BCCC will conduct a formal quarterly evaluation to assess procurements
to consolidate vendors and leverage purchasing efficiencies.
Page 7 of 25

--- Page 44 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Year-End Closing Entries
Finding 5
BCCC could not provide documentation to support the propriety of accrued
federal fund revenue entries totaling $1.4 million which BCCC management
advised may not be recoverable.
We recommend that BCCC
a. ensure that all accrued federal fund revenue entries are properly
supported, as required by GAD policies; and
b. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable to GAD,
including those noted above, and work with the Department of Budget
and Management to resolve any related deficits.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/31/2026
Please provide details of BCCC notes that the recording of accrued revenue and deferred revenue
corrective action or for restricted funds is a standard component of year-end
explain disagreement. closing procedures. This is performed in accordance with State
requirements to align revenue recognition with related expenditures.
BCCC will enhance its year-end closing procedures to require
documented support for all accrued revenue entries, including
verification of eligibility, timing of reimbursement, and reasonable
assurance of collectability within the prescribed period.
In addition, BCCC will implement a secondary review process for
significant or complex accruals, including confirmation of supporting
documentation and assessment of collectability prior to recording.
BCCC will also perform follow-up monitoring of accrued receivables to
ensure timely collection and to identify and adjust any amounts that are
not recoverable.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 08/31/2026
Page 8 of 25

--- Page 45 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of BCCC acknowledges that certain accrued federal fund revenue,
corrective action or including COVID-related grant funding, was not ultimately
explain disagreement. recoverable due to changes in reimbursement processes at the U.S.
Department of Education. BCCC made multiple attempts to obtain
reimbursement, including submitting required documentation and
follow-up inquiries; however, these efforts were not successful.
BCCC recognizes that amounts determined to be uncollectable must
be properly evaluated, reported, and resolved in accordance with State
requirements. Accordingly, BCCC will coordinate with the
Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) to
ensure that any uncollectable amounts are appropriately reported and
adjusted.
In addition, BCCC will work with the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) to address any resulting financial impact and
determine appropriate resolution of related deficits.
BCCC will strengthen its year-end review processes to
include timely assessment of collectability for accrued revenues,
escalation of potential collection issues, and earlier coordination with
State agencies when reimbursement delays or uncertainties arise.
Page 9 of 25

--- Page 46 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Student Financial Aid
Finding 6
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over significant aspects of the
financial aid award and record keeping processes.
We recommend that BCCC ensure that manual adjustments to financial aid
awards, as well as required verifications of financial aid application data and
satisfactory academic progress by financial aid recipients are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2026
Please provide details of While existing processes include reconciliation-level oversight, BCCC
corrective action or recognizes the opportunity to strengthen formal supervisory review
explain disagreement. controls and will implement the following corrective actions:
 Independent Review Process: Establish secondary review and
approval for manual award adjustments, verification outcomes,
and SAP determinations
 Segregation of Duties: Separate processing and supervisory
review functions
 Compliance Oversight: Designate a Compliance Officer to
conduct periodic file reviews
 System Controls: Utilize Banner to track adjustments, enforce
approvals, and maintain audit trails
 Training & SOPs: Update procedures to define review
requirements, documentation standards, and approval thresholds
 Ongoing Monitoring: Conduct periodic internal audits and
quality assurance reviews
BCCC remains committed to full compliance with DOE Title IV
regulations and continuous improvement of internal controls.
Page 10 of 25

--- Page 47 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
BCCC did not take appropriate action when it identified suspected fictitious
students attempting to obtain financial aid, and awarded and disbursed aid
to certain of these students without proper verifications.
We recommend that BCCC
a. take appropriate action when it identifies suspected fictitious students,
including those noted above;
b. in conjunction with the Office of Attorney General determine if funding
needs to be returned to the federal DOE and MHEC; and
c. refer suspected fictitious students, including those noted above, to
appropriate authorities in accordance with federal regulations.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2026
Please provide details of The identified gaps have been addressed through the implementation of
corrective action or strengthened controls aligned with federal requirements and institutional
explain disagreement. risk management practices.
BCCC is implementing a centralized tracking process for all accounts
identified as potentially fraudulent. This process requires documentation
of review actions, status, and resolution outcomes. Financial aid
disbursements are restricted for all flagged accounts through system
and manual holds until identity, enrollment, and eligibility
are verified and all conflicting information is resolved in accordance
with 34 CFR §668.16(f).
In addition, BCCC is establishing formal procedures to ensure that
suspected fraud cases are evaluated for referral to the U.S. Department
of Education Office of Inspector General (DOE OIG) in accordance
with 34 CFR §668.16(g). The College will also coordinate with the
Office of the Attorney General, as appropriate, to assess any required
recovery of federal or state funds.
Page 11 of 25

--- Page 48 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
BCCC will continue to monitor these controls through periodic internal
review and compliance monitoring to ensure consistent
application, timely resolution of flagged accounts, and adherence to
federal and State requirements.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will coordinate with the Office of the Attorney General, the U.S.
corrective action or Department of Education, and the Maryland Higher Education
explain disagreement. Commission (MHEC) to determine whether any federal or state funds
associated with identified accounts must be returned.
For accounts determined to involve improper or fraudulent activity,
BCCC will ensure if applicable that all required adjustments are made,
including reversal and return of Title IV funds in accordance
with federal requirements and correction of any related State funding or
reporting, including Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) calculations.
BCCC has implemented formal procedures to support this process,
including centralized documentation of suspected and confirmed fraud
cases, required evaluation of fund recovery obligations, and coordination
with appropriate external agencies.
In addition, BCCC will maintain documentation of all determinations,
communications, and actions taken to ensure compliance with federal
and State requirements and to support audit and oversight activities.
Summer 2026 and Fall 2026 will provide an opportunity to implement
defined processes to minimize this exposure and adjust accordingly
based on results.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2026
Please provide details of BCCC has implemented formal procedures and strengthened internal
corrective action or controls to ensure suspected fictitious student activity is promptly
explain disagreement. identified, documented, and referred in accordance with 34 CFR
§668.16(g). Cases are centrally tracked and evaluated, with those
meeting the threshold referred to the U.S. Department of Education
Office of Inspector General and supported by appropriate
documentation. All related accounts have holds to prevent further
disbursement during review.
Page 12 of 25

--- Page 49 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
The College will continue to monitor these procedures and test internal
controls and will update processes as warranted in response to the
ongoing national trend of increased fictitious account activity.
Page 13 of 25

--- Page 50 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 8
BCCC did not establish adequate procedures and controls to ensure the
propriety of payroll transactions resulting in certain transactions that were
unsupported or improper.
We recommend that BCCC
a. develop formal procedures governing the criteria, documentation, and
approvals (such as Board of Trustees) needed for adjustments (repeat);
b. ensure that all payroll adjustments are supported with adequate
documentation and properly calculated (repeat), including those noted
above, and recover any amounts that are determined to be improper;
c. ensure employees are timely removed from the payroll upon separation,
investigate any payments to employees after termination and recover any
amounts determined to be improper, including those noted above; and
d. ensure all timesheets are submitted and approved, as required, including
those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will develop and implement formal standard operating
corrective action or procedures governing payroll adjustments, including defined
explain disagreement. criteria, required documentation, and approval requirements. All payroll
adjustments require a formal request supported by appropriate
documentation and CFO and/or President approval prior to processing.
Upon approval, Human Resources and Payroll review the request for
completeness and compliance, and a Personnel Action Form (PAF)
is initiated and processed through an electronic approval workflow.
Supporting documentation and approvals are retained electronically, and
official documentation is maintained in the Office of Human Resources.
Page 14 of 25

--- Page 51 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
These procedures establish consistent controls over payroll adjustments,
including required documentation, defined approval authority, and
centralized processing to ensure accuracy and propriety.
BCCC will continue to monitor and refine these procedures to ensure
consistent application and alignment with internal controls and State
requirements.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of All payroll adjustments require supporting documentation, validated
corrective action or calculations, and appropriate approvals before processing. For the
explain disagreement. specific instances identified in the audit, BCCC will take corrective
action. The College will ensure that all payment adjustments will be
addressed accordingly. In the event of overpayments, recovery efforts
will be processed in accordance with State requirements, including
required notification steps prior to referral to the Central Collection
Unit.
To address this matter going forward, BCCC is developing formal
procedures governing payroll adjustments, including required supporting
documentation, standardized calculation review, and defined approval
requirements prior to processing. These procedures establish clear
accountability and documentation standards to ensure that all payroll
adjustments are properly supported and accurately calculated.
In addition, BCCC will implement periodic review of payroll
adjustments to ensure compliance with established procedures and
to identify and address any discrepancies in a timely manner.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC is implementing a formalized separation process to ensure that
corrective action or employees are timely and accurately removed from the payroll system
explain disagreement. upon termination. This process includes documented separation, entry of
the appropriate termination action in the ERP system
and required review and approval prior to removal from the payroll file.
To strengthen controls, BCCC will establish a verification step to
confirm that terminated employees are removed from active payroll
status before subsequent payroll processing.
Page 15 of 25

--- Page 52 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Payroll and Human Resources will coordinate to ensure that all
separation actions, including final payments such as leave payouts, are
properly recorded and completed.
A bi-annual review process will be implemented to ensure all separate
employees have been removed from the BCCC ERP system.
Recommendation 8d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of Timesheet compliance monitoring will be implemented with escalation
corrective action or for non-submission. BCCC will implement strengthened controls to
explain disagreement. ensure that all timesheets are submitted and approved in accordance
with established policy prior to payroll processing. Timesheet
submission and supervisory approval will be required as a condition for
payment, and transactions lacking required approval will not be
processed until compliance is achieved.
To support these controls, Human Resources will issue timesheet status
reports for each pay period to identify missing or unapproved timesheets
for both permanent and contractual employees. These reports will be
used to enforce timely completion and approval and to ensure
accountability at the supervisory level.
In addition, BCCC will clearly define and communicate responsibilities
for employees and supervisors regarding timesheet submission and
approval and will implement follow-up procedures for noncompliance,
including escalation where necessary.
Page 16 of 25

--- Page 53 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 9
BCCC did not have adequate accountability and control over certain
collections.
We recommend that BCCC establish adequate accountability and control
over collections in accordance with the Comptroller of Maryland General
Accounting Division’s Accounting Procedures Manual. Specifically, we
recommend that BCCC
a. record mail collections immediately upon receipt;
b. ensure collections are properly secured prior to deposit;
c. document the transfer of funds to the bank courier;
d. perform an independent documented verification to ensure all collections
received were deposited; and
e. conduct documented investigations of all chargebacks, including those
noted above, and take appropriate corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2026
Please provide details of While mail collections were recorded, the supporting logs were not
corrective action or consistently retained in a centralized, controlled manner, resulting in
explain disagreement. gaps in documentation and audit trail.
To address this matter, BCCC is implementing strengthened procedures
requiring that all mail collections are recorded immediately upon receipt
using standardized logs that are maintained in a secure, centralized
location with appropriate backup and retention controls.
In addition, the Controller’s Office will establish requirements for
documentation retention and supervisory review of mail collection logs
to ensure completeness, accuracy, and accountability. Periodic
monitoring will be conducted to confirm that collections are consistently
recorded and supported in accordance with Comptroller requirements.
Page 17 of 25

--- Page 54 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of The Office of Student Accounts is implementing a formal Standard
corrective action or Operating Procedure (SOP) to ensure secure access controls. The SOP
explain disagreement. defines roles and responsibilities for mandatory procedures and access
controls.
We are implementing strengthened internal controls to ensure all funds
are properly secured from the point of receipt through courier pick-up.
This includes standardized safe procedures, restricted-access storage,
dual-custody handling, and documented chain-of-custody protocols.
These measures will ensure collections remain protected and fully
compliant with State requirements.
Staff were trained on the SOP upon implementation, and
management conducts ongoing oversight and periodic reviews to ensure
continued compliance and effectiveness of access control measures.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC is implementing a documented chain-of-custody process
corrective action or requiring dual signatures for all courier transfers and retention of courier
explain disagreement. receipts in the deposit file.
Couriers are required to sign for pick-up with documented cash count to
ensure accurate reconciliation. Independent review of the courier pick-up
logs is being implemented to fully reconcile with the Controller’s Office
to ensure accuracy.
Recommendation 9d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2026
Please provide details of An independent reviewer will verify that all collections logged are
corrective action or deposited in full and on time. Verification is documented and retained
explain disagreement. with deposit packets. The Office of Student Accounts and the
Controller’s Office will perform independently, documented verification
that all collections received were deposited by implementing a
coordinated reconciliation process. The Office of Student Accounts
documents all collections received through daily collection logs, system
reports, and receipt records.
Page 18 of 25

--- Page 55 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
The Controller’s Office, independent of the collection function, verifies
that these recorded collections were deposited by reconciling collection
reports to bank deposit confirmations and bank statements. Differences
are investigated and resolved in a timely manner, and evidence of
review and approval is documented. This separation of duties and
documented reconciliation process provides assurance that all collections
received are accurately and completely deposited.
Recommendation 9e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will formalize chargeback investigation procedures requiring
corrective action or documentation of root cause, corrective action, and communication with
explain disagreement. affected departments.
The College is prepared to address each chargeback on an individual
basis, and each instance requires independent research. Research items
include, but are not limited to: root-cause, investigation, and resolution.
Finding 10
BCCC did not take sufficient action when it identified missing collections
resulting in the failure to identify, investigate, and pursue an additional
$23,000 in missing funds.
We recommend that BCCC
a. take sufficient actions when it becomes aware of questionable activity,
b. consult with the OAG before taking any actions related to the missing
collections noted above, and
c. ensure any future instances of possible criminal or unethical conduct are
referred to the appropriate entities in accordance with the
aforementioned Executive Order.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Page 19 of 25

--- Page 56 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of BCCC will implement an escalation protocol requiring immediate
corrective action or notification of supervisors and Public Safety when questionable activity
explain disagreement. is identified. All incidents are documented and reviewed by the CFO and
the President.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 08/31/2026
Please provide details of There will be Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) implemented to
corrective action or address missing documents prior to the escalation of submission to the
explain disagreement. Office of Attorney General.
Recommendation 10c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will align referral procedures with State law, ensuring timely
corrective action or reporting to appropriate authorities.
explain disagreement.
BCCC will establish a SOP regarding potential instances of theft,
inclusive but not limited to: referral to OAG; contact to local law
enforcement, and/or immediate dismissal of current role.
Page 20 of 25

--- Page 57 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 11
BCCC did not have adequate controls over corporate purchasing card (CPC)
activity.
We recommend that BCCC comply with the aforementioned Manual and
a. perform a documented independent supervisory review for the propriety
of all CPC transactions,
b. verify goods and services paid for were received and supported, and
c. ensure supervisors use available Level-3 data as part of the monthly
review to aid in the assessment of the propriety of purchases and
payments.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 08/31/2026
Please provide details of BCCC is reinforcing requirements for monthly independent review and
corrective action or approval of all CPC transactions by Authorized Reviewers and Fiscal
explain disagreement. Officers. This includes required signing and dating of CPC activity logs
and monthly statements to certify the propriety of purchases and the
accuracy of reconciliations.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of BCCC will require documented receipt verification before CPC
corrective action or payments are approved.
explain disagreement.
A formal SOP is being developed that requires supervisors to validate
goods/services that match the specific transactions. BCCC has
strengthened procedures requiring cardholders to submit itemized
receipts and appropriate supporting documentation, such as packing
slips, delivery confirmations, and/or service completion records, for all
CPC transactions.
Page 21 of 25

--- Page 58 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
In addition, newly implemented, CPC holders are required to indicate on
their monthly reconciliation to indicate each receipt of good/service for
each transaction.
As part of the review process, the Controller’s Office staff will verify
that documentation confirming receipt of goods or services is present
prior to reconciliation and approval. Transactions lacking adequate
supporting documentation will not be approved until required evidence
is provided.
Recommendation 11c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2026
Please provide details of PCPA’s will incorporate Level-3 merchant data into monthly CPC
corrective action or reviews to identify unusual or unsupported purchases. All merchant data
explain disagreement. is incorporated into the monthly review process.
Page 22 of 25

--- Page 59 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 12 through 15 related to
"cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with BCCC’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, BCCC’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 14
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 15
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 23 of 25

--- Page 60 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
Equipment
Finding 16
BCCC did not conduct required physical inventories of its equipment and
wrote off missing equipment valued at approximately $20.1 million without
performing an investigation or obtaining approval from the Department of
General Services (DGS), as required.
We recommend that BCCC
a. conduct timely periodic documented physical inventories of equipment
(repeat);
b. ensure that the results are investigated and reconciled to the detail
inventory records (repeat); and
c. obtain DGS approval prior to removing missing items from its inventory
records, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 16a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2027
Please provide details of BCCC will resume annual physical inventories of equipment with
corrective action or documented results and supervisory review. Periodic physical
explain disagreement. inventories of sensitive equipment (e.g., laptops, desktops, tablets, and
other technology assets) will be conducted.
Inventory schedules will be established in advance and formally
approved by management to ensure accountability
and timely completion. Detailed written procedures will
be developed outlining inventory methodologies, documentation
standards, reconciliation steps, and retention requirements.
To ensure sustainability, BCCC will assign clear ownership and
responsibility for inventory management. Management will also explore
the use of inventory software tools, barcode scanning, and departmental
certifications to improve inventory accuracy and efficiency. Progress and
Page 24 of 25

--- Page 61 ---
Baltimore City Community College
Agency Response Form
completion of inventories will be monitored through documented status
reports submitted to senior management.
Recommendation 16b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2027
Please provide details of BCCC will strengthen post-inventory controls by implementing formal
corrective action or investigation and reconciliation procedures for all inventory
explain disagreement. discrepancies. These procedures will require that:
 All missing, unaccounted-for, or location-variant assets are
individually reviewed and investigated;
 Departments with custody responsibility are required to provide
written explanations or supporting documentation; and
 Investigative outcomes are documented, reviewed, and approved
by management. Reconciliations will include a detailed
comparison of physical inventory results to fixed asset records,
with discrepancies tracked through completion. Sensitive items
will receive heightened scrutiny, including escalation of
unresolved discrepancies to senior management and, where
applicable, referral to appropriate authorities. Inventory
reconciliation reports will be retained and periodically reviewed
to monitor trends and identify control weaknesses.
Recommendation 16c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2027
Please provide details of BCCC will require DGS approval before removing missing or
corrective action or unaccounted-for items from inventory records. BCCC will formalize
explain disagreement. procedures to ensure that no equipment is removed from inventory
records without prior documented approval from DGS, as required by
the Inventory Control Manual. Disposal, write-off, or removal requests
will be supported by complete documentation, including inventory
investigation results and justification for removal, and submitted to DGS
for approval before processing.
Asset management staff will receive refresher training on DGS
requirements, approval protocols, and documentation standards.
Management will also establish a review and approval checkpoint within
the inventory process to prevent unauthorized removals and ensure
compliance prior to any updates to asset records.
Page 25 of 25

--- Page 62 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Robert A. Wells Jr., CPA
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Managers
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Senior Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Johanna K. Bachman, CIA
Summer L. Carbaugh, CPA
Jessica L. Carroll
Emily M. Hofstaedter
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditors