Title: Maryland Department of Health - Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers - Holly Center and Potomac Center
Date: 2026-06-05
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a26ea7cb6346614c2791867
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:06:44.418834
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
June 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 5, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Holly Center and Potomac Center, which includes the Secure
Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment (SETT) Program for the period beginning
July 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2025. These units, collectively referred to as the
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers (IDRC) provide comprehensive
services to maximize the physical, intellectual, emotional, and social development
of individuals who have borderline to profound intellectual disabilities.
Our audit disclosed that the Potomac Center did not deposit $168,500 in patient
funds received since March 2020 including 1,295 checks and money orders
totaling $166,700 and $1,800 in cash. In addition, the Potomac Center did not
properly safeguard these undeposited funds and could not locate $48,200
including 91 checks totaling $46,000. Finally, the Potomac Center did not return
$13,800 in unspent patient funds to 7 patients who were discharged.
MDH Healthcare System’s response to this audit, on behalf of the IDRCs, is
included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted
agreement to our finding and related recommendations and will notify MDH
Healthcare System of any needed clarification to ensure the responses sufficiently
address the related finding.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
IDRCs.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) operates two Intellectual Disabilities
Residential Centers (IDRCs). The IDRCs are the Holly Center and the Potomac
Center, which includes the forensic residential center Secure Evaluation and
Therapeutic Treatment (SETT) Program. The IDRCs are federally certified
Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2025, IDRCs’ operating
expenditures totaled approximately $63.2 million, which consisted primarily of
general fund expenditures (see Figure 1).
As of June 30, 2025, 11 percent of the total 470 positions were vacant. The
individual vacancy rates for the Holly Center and the Potomac Center/SETT were
9 percent and 13 percent, respectively. Vacancies at the Potomac Center may
have contributed, at least in part, to the finding in this report.
Figure 1
IDRC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 418
Vacant 52
Total 470
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $49,318,477
Technical and Special Fees 2,842,359
Operating Expenses 11,035,767
Total $63,196,603
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $63,124,932
Special Fund 46,372
Reimbursable Fund 25,299
Total $63,196,603
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
 Holly Center provides comprehensive services for individuals with intellectual
disabilities that reside in the nine counties of Maryland’s Eastern Shore. As of
June 30, 2025, the Holly Center had a licensed capacity of 100 inpatient residents.
During fiscal year 2025, the Holly Center had an average daily inpatient
population of 45 residents. According to the State’s records, the Holly Center’s
expenditures were approximately $22.7 million during fiscal year 2025.
 Potomac Center serves individuals with intellectual disabilities from the entire
State. The Potomac Center provides services intended to maximize the physical,
intellectual, emotional, and social development of individuals with borderline to
profound intellectual disabilities. It also provides habilitative services to expedite
the return of individuals to a less restrictive environment. Furthermore, the
Potomac Center operates a Transitions Program to serve individuals who have
both intellectual disabilities and mental illness and to provide a therapeutic
habilitation model before discharge to the community. As of June 30, 2025, the
Potomac Center has a licensed capacity of 62 residents. During fiscal year 2025,
the Potomac Center had an average daily inpatient population of 42 residents.
According to the State’s records, the Potomac Center’s expenditures were
approximately $26.9 million during fiscal year 2025.
SETT provides evaluation, assessment, and active treatment to people with
intellectual disabilities and court involvement. As of June 30, 2025, SETT has a
licensed inpatient capacity of 32 residents. During fiscal year 2025, SETT had an
average daily inpatient population of 23 residents. According to the State’s
records, SETT expenditures were approximately $12.7 million during fiscal year
2025.
 Developmental Disabilities Administration Facility Maintenance program
provides facility maintenance services to three closed facilities that no longer
provide services to individuals with intellectual disabilities: Joseph D.
Brandenburg Center which closed June 30, 2011; Rosewood Center which closed
June 30, 2009; and Henryton Center which closed in fiscal year 1985. According
to the State’s records, expenditures were approximately $900,000 during fiscal
year 2025. MDH advised us that these expenditures primarily relate to workers
compensation, utilities, and security services for the Rosewood Center.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 24, 2022. See Figure 2 for the results
of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Potomac Center obtained nursing services using
contracts that had been fully expended and/or expired. In
Finding 1 Not repeated
addition, the related invoices were not adequately verified
and were paid using improper payment methods.
The Holly Center prepayment review of amounts
Finding 2 invoiced for nursing services was not sufficiently Not repeated
comprehensive.
Ten Holly Center employees potentially violated State
ethics law and Maryland Department of Health policy by
Finding 3 having secondary employment with vendors that provided Not repeated
services to the Holly Center, including one employee that
participated in the oversight of these vendors.
The Potomac Center and the Holly Center had not
established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of
Finding 4 Not repeated
payroll transactions, including adjustments to employee
pay and leave balances.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Patient Funds
Finding 1
The Potomac Center did not deposit or adequately secure $168,500 in patient
fund collections recorded as received since March 2020 and could not locate
$48,200 of the undeposited funds. In addition, the Center did not return
$13,800 in unspent funds to 7 patients discharged prior to March 2025.
Analysis
The Potomac Center did not properly control and account for patient funds.
Patient funds consist of amounts earned by or received on behalf of the Center’s
patients. The Center is responsible for processing collections and disbursements
of these funds on the patient’s behalf and accurately maintaining the related
records.
 As of February 2026, the Center had not deposited any of the approximately
$168,500 in recorded collections received between March 2020 and January
2026 including 1,295 checks and money orders totaling $166,700 and $1,800
in cash. According to Center management this condition resulted from the
Center’s failure to open a new bank account for patient funds when the State
changed banks in March 2020. Center management could not readily explain
why a new account was not opened over the ensuing six-year period. The
failure to deposit the collections is significant because 1,145 checks totaling
$117,400 were more than 6 months old and may no longer be valid.1 In
addition, the Center had to use State funds to cover patient purchases totaling
$131,800 that should have been paid for with the undeposited checks.
 The Center did not restrictively endorse and record the patient fund checks
upon receipt. Specifically, our review of the aforementioned undeposited
checks on hand disclosed that none of the checks were restrictively endorsed.
In addition, 27 of the undeposited checks totaling approximately $600 were
not recorded upon receipt. Restrictive endorsements limit how the check can
be used, enhancing security and preventing unauthorized transactions, and
recordation of the funds establishes accountability over the funds should they
subsequently go missing.
1 State law provides that a bank is not obligated to pay checks presented six months after the check
date.
6

--- Page 9 ---
 The Center could not locate approximately $48,200 of the recorded but
undeposited collections including 91 checks totaling $46,000, 10 money
orders totaling $400, and cash totaling $1,800. Despite numerous attempts to
locate the funds in response to our inquiries, as of March 20, 2026, the
Center could not locate these collections or provide the disposition of these
funds. For example, the Center had not researched any of the missing checks
to determine if they had been deposited into another Center account or into a
non-State account.
 The Center did not return unspent patient funds when the patients were
discharged. For example, as of December 2025, the Center had not returned
funds totaling approximately $13,800 to 7 patients who were discharged
prior to March 2025.
The aforementioned conditions precluded the Center from recording these funds
in the State’s accounting records and from properly accounting for the patient
funds. This contributed to the missing checks going undetected until we brought
the matter to their attention.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual
requires that all collections be recorded and restrictively endorsed immediately
upon receipt, generally deposited within one business day of receipt, and recorded
in the State’s accounting records. In addition, State law requires any patient funds
in excess of $300 to be deposited into separate interest-bearing accounts and that
discharged patients be paid any balance in their account, including interest earned,
within three banking days.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System ensure the Potomac Center
a. immediately establishes appropriate bank accounts for patient fund
collections as required, and works with MDH to determine the validity
and proper disposition of the undeposited checks;
b. investigates the aforementioned missing funds and takes appropriate
action including referring any missing funds to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division;
c. restrictively endorses checks and money orders, and records and timely
deposits all collections; and
d. returns funds to patients upon discharge, including those noted above.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH): the Holly Center and the Potomac
Center, which includes the forensic residential center Secure Evaluation and
Therapeutic Treatment (SETT) Program for the period beginning July 1, 2021 and
ending June 30, 2025. These units are collectively referred to as the Intellectual
Disabilities Residential Centers (IDRCs).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the IDRCs’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain procurements and disbursements for
operating expenditures, corporate purchasing cards, patient funds, equipment,
admissions, and certain payroll activities. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the IDRCs by
MDH’s Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll
and procurement activities, maintenance of certain accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the MDH – Office
of the Secretary and Other Units.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2021 to June 30, 2025, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
8

--- Page 11 ---
and to the extent practicable, observations of operations at the IDRCs. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Under MDH Healthcare System, a part of MDH Office of the Secretary, the
IDRCs’ managements are responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the IDRCs, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
9

--- Page 12 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the IDRCs’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also considered a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the IDRCs that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH Healthcare System, on behalf of the IDRCs, to our
finding and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its
response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of May 2026 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
Medical Care Programs
1 Medical Care Programs Administration 05/20/26
Administration
Office of the Chief Medical
2 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/19/26
Examiner
 Managed Care Program, known as
Medical Care Programs
HealthChoice includes oversight of the
3 Administration – Managed 01/14/26
nine private Managed Care
Care Program
Organizations
Behavioral Health
Administration and Medical  Behavioral Health Administration
Care Programs Administration  Medical Care Programs Administration
4 10/03/25
- Administrative Service Administrative Service Organization for
Organization for Behavioral Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
5 08/25/25
Children and Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
Developmental Disabilities
6 Developmental Disabilities Administration 06/18/25
Administration
 22 Health Professional Boards and
7 Regulatory Services Commissions 04/09/25
 The Office of Health Care Quality
8 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 03/19/25
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Prevention and Health
Administration
Promotion Administration -
 Office of Population Health
Office of Population Health
Improvement
9 Improvement - Office of 08/09/24
 Office of Preparedness and Response
Preparedness and Response -
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Office of Provider
Regulation – Office of Controlled
Engagement and Regulation
Substances Administration
11

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of May 2026 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulation – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
10 Pharmacy Services Pharmacy Services 08/09/24
11 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center
State Psychiatric Hospital
12  Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
Centers
 Springfield Hospital Center
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review
Health Regulatory
13 Commission 01/25/24
Commissions
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive
Director for Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and
14 Disabilities 10/19/23
Other Units
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center
15 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
12

--- Page 15 ---
APPENDIX
June 4, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of
Health – Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers – Holly Center and Potomac Center for the
period beginning July 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2025.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Meena Seshamani, M.D., Ph.D.
Secretary
cc: Kate Wolff, Chief of Staff
Emily Berg, JD, MPH, Deputy Chief of Staff
Anita Everett, Director, MDH Healthcare System
Clint Hackett, Deputy Secretary for Operations
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance
& Information Security, MDH

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
Patient Funds
Finding 1
The Potomac Center did not deposit or adequately secure $168,500 in patient
fund collections recorded as received since March 2020 and could not locate
$48,200 of the undeposited funds. In addition, the Center did not return
$13,800 in unspent funds to 7 patients discharged prior to March 2025.
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System ensure the Potomac Center
a. immediately establishes appropriate bank accounts for patient fund
collections as required, and works with MDH to determine the validity
and proper disposition of the undeposited checks;
b. investigates the aforementioned missing funds and takes appropriate
action including referring any missing funds to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division;
c. restrictively endorses checks and money orders, and records and timely
deposits all collections; and
d. returns funds to patients upon discharge, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as The undeposited funds totaling $48,200, identified as unlocated by
deemed necessary. OLA, have been physically accounted for as cash on hand, funds
pending return to vendors, or funds distributed to discharged residents.
Potomac Center will document and finalize a full reconciliation of the
entire $168,500 by August 30, 2026.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/30/26
Please provide details of
corrective action or The MDH Healthcare System and Potomac Center are actively working
explain disagreement. with the State Treasurer’s Office (STO) to open a new Fulton Bank
depository account. The application is currently pending STO final
approval, with a target account opening date of June 30, 2026. Once the
account is established, the Potomac Center will coordinate with the STO
to replace, reissue, or transfer the outdated checks currently being
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
secured in the facility safe. This administrative reissuance process is
expected to take up to 60 days, concluding by August 30, 2026.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The Potomac Center conducted a comprehensive physical inventory and
corrective action or reconciliation of the check log against the safe's contents. The $48,200
explain disagreement. cited by OLA represents historical discrepancies regarding discharged
or transferred residents rather than missing funds. Because all funds
have been accounted for and determined not to be missing, a report to
the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division is not required.
All recovered valid checks will be deposited into the new account upon
opening.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/30/26
Please provide details of Delays in check deposits were due to the lack of an active depository
corrective action or account. To secure these funds in the interim, administrative staff
explain disagreement. restrictively endorsed all checks on hand as “For Deposit Only State of
Maryland Resident Funds” as of May 15, 2026. Moving forward, a strict
timeline will be formalized via local Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) requiring all incoming collections to be logged, stamped
immediately upon receipt, and deposited within 24 business hours once
the new bank account is operational.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/30/26
Please provide details of The Potomac Center has initiated the process to transfer the lingering
corrective action or balances of the 7 identified discharged residents to their current
explain disagreement. providers. Delays were due to satisfying General Accounting guidelines,
which require two proofs of residency to update addresses in FMIS.
To prevent future delays, the Potomac Center is drafting a local
Standard Operating Procedure to mandate a clear, streamlined protocol
for transferring balances immediately upon a resident's discharge.
Simultaneously, the MDH Healthcare System is updating its system-
wide policy (DHMH 02.02.06 - Policy on Management of Facility
Residents' Funds) to clarify fiscal oversight and discharge
responsibilities across all 11 MDH Healthcare System facilities.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 18 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler, CFE
Principal Auditor
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Matthew P. Henry
Kyle D. Howser
Jessica G. McRobie
John E. Rooney
Staff Auditors
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Data Analytics Auditors