Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Baltimore County
Date: 2026-06-05
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a26ea92b6346614c27932c1
Extracted: 2026-07-13T12:06:35.803604
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Baltimore County, Maryland
June 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 5, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Baltimore County, Maryland for the period beginning November 16,
2021 and ending January 31, 2026. The Office performs various functions for the
public, including maintaining various legal records, recording certain real estate
documents, collecting related fees and taxes, and issuing certain licenses.
Our audit disclosed that the Office did not have adequate procedures to ensure
that certain criminal case dispositions were accurately recorded. According to the
Judiciary’s records, approximately 23,000 criminal cases were closed during our
audit period. Our test of 12 of these cases disclosed that 1 individual’s sentence
was not accurately recorded on the automated court system.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Office, is included as an
appendix to this report. We have reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Baltimore County and others, and subsequently distributes the funds
collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State's accounting records, the Office's fiscal year 2025 revenues
totaled $40,959,665. These revenues were distributed in the following manner:
 $2,442,220 was distributed to Baltimore County,
 $54,225 was distributed to others, and
 $38,463,220 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the
State for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The majority of the Office's fiscal year 2025 expenditures, which totaled
$16,939,606 (see Figure 1), were salaries and wages that were paid primarily
from a general fund appropriation.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds and special purpose
funds that, according to its records, had balances totaling $3,493,110 as of
December 31, 2025.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Baltimore County
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 146
Vacant 14
Total 160
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $16,108,956
Operating Expenses 830,650
Total $16,939,606
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Source
Funding
General Fund $14,880,391
Special Fund 1,798,080
Reimbursable Fund 261,135
Total $16,939,606
Source: State financial and personnel records
Findings and Recommendations
Criminal Court Case Dispositions
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system resulting in one improperly
recorded sentence not being detected.
Analysis
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system. A courtroom clerk manually records the
case disposition on various documents that are used by other Office personnel to
4

--- Page 7 ---
update the Maryland Electronic Courts (MDEC) system. Our review disclosed
that supervisory personnel did not use independent source documents to ensure
dispositions were accurately recorded in MDEC except for cases that included a
judgement for probation.
Our test of 12 criminal cases1 that did not involve probation, disclosed that the
Office did not properly record 1 case on MDEC that included 13 charges and
associated sentences. Specifically, our review disclosed that the Office
erroneously recorded a 20-year sentence for the use of a firearm in commission of
a felony as a 5-year sentence in MDEC. Since this case did not involve probation
it was not subject to any supervisory review, resulting in the error going
undetected until we brought the matter to the Office’s attention. The Office
subsequently corrected the MDEC record and notified the Maryland Department
of Public Safety and Correctional Services. While this individual was serving a
separate sentence concurrently and remained incarcerated, the failure to identify
and correct inaccurate case information could potentially result in premature
release
According to the Judiciary’s records, there were approximately 23,000 criminal
cases closed during our audit period. The Office could not readily identify how
many of these cases did not include probation.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office ensure court dispositions are verified by
supervisory personnel, at least on a test basis, to independent source
documents, such as courtroom recordings.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Baltimore County, Maryland for the period beginning November 16,
2021 and ending January 31, 2026. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
1 Case records were selected based on the case disposition, complexity of the case record, severity
of the charges, and date of the disposition for closed cases between November 15, 2022 and
January 12, 2026. A case can include numerous counts and offenses resulting in various charges
and sentences.
5

--- Page 8 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), certain payroll activities, bank accounts, and certain
court activities.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as human resources and payroll activities, invoice processing, and maintenance of
budgetary accounting records) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Judiciary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 16, 2021 to January 31, 2026, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
6

--- Page 9 ---
data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the Office’s court record systems for the purposes of
testing certain areas, such as court activities. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to the Office that
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
7

--- Page 10 ---
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 12 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Baltimore County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Criminal Court Case Dispositions
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system resulting in one improperly
recorded sentence not being detected.
We recommend that the Office ensure court dispositions are verified by
supervisory personnel, at least on a test basis, to independent source
documents, such as courtroom recordings.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide This one criminal case had 21 total counts/offenses and there was no
additional comments as effect to the total time served for this incarcerated individual. Count 12,
deemed necessary. which was the one improperly recorded, ran concurrently to count 2,
which was ultimately the same length of sentence.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of Our office has enhanced our current court review process by using an
corrective action or independent source document to verify court dispositions on 10% of
explain disagreement. criminal case dispositions. Verification to be done by a leadership team
member.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Zain Khalid
Malkah B. Safren
Staff Auditors