Title: Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2022, the MCAAHC was established as an independent unit of State government.  MCAAHC’s activities were previously subject to audit as part of the Executive Department – Office of the Governor.
Date: 2026-07-10
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a5149d98953c2100760f809
Extracted: 2026-07-20T11:59:07.945733
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Commission on African American
History and Culture
July 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 10, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Commission on
African American History and Culture (MCAAHC) for the period beginning
July 1, 2022 and ending February 17, 2026. MCAAHC along with its Board of
Directors, oversees the programs of the Banneker-Douglass-Tubman Museum.
Our audit disclosed that MCAAHC did not establish adequate accountability and
controls over its art and historical artifacts collection, which was valued at
approximately $478,000 as of March 2026. MCAAHC also did not establish
adequate control over collections and did not have procedures to ensure the
propriety of purchases made using a corporate purchasing card.
MCAAHC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we reviewed the response and noted agreement to our
findings and related recommendations and will notify MCAAHC of any needed
clarification to ensure the responses sufficiently address the related findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MCAAHC.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Creation and Responsibilities 4
Findings and Recommendations 6
Art and Historical Artifacts
Finding 1 – The Maryland Commission on African American History and 6
Culture (MCAAHC) did not establish adequate accountability and
controls over its art and historical artifacts collection.
Collections
Finding 2 – MCAAHC did not establish adequate accountability and 7
control over collections.
Corporate Purchasing Card
Finding 3 – MCAAHC did not have procedures to ensure the propriety of 8
corporate purchasing card transactions.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Creation and Responsibilities
Chapters 451 and 452, Laws of Maryland 2022, effective July 1, 2022, established
the Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture (MCAAHC)
as an independent unit of State government. Prior to this law, MCAAHC existed
within the Governor's Office of Community Initiatives and MCAAHC’s activities
were subject to audit during our Office’s audit of the Executive Department –
Office of the Governor. MCAAHC includes 21 members that are appointed to 4-
year terms by the Governor with Senate advice and consent. Subject to the
approval of the Governor, MCAAHC appoints the Director who administers
MCAAHC activities and supervises the appointment and removal of MCAAHC
personnel.
MCAAHC’s mission is to discover, document, preserve, and educate Maryland
residents and visitors on the State’s African American heritage. MCAAHC is
responsible for overseeing operation of the Banneker-Douglass-Tubman Museum
and, in conjunction with the Maryland Historical Trust, administers the African
American Heritage Preservation Program to support African American museums,
universities, and heritage sites in Maryland. According to the State’s records,
MCAAHC’s fiscal year 2025 expenditures totaled approximately $1.6 million, of
which $1.2 million related to salaries (see Figure 1).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
MCAAHC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 10
Vacant 1
Total 11
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $1,190,998
Technical and Special Fees 16,085
Other Operating Expenses 418,716
Total $1,625,799
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $1,587,799
Special Fund 38,000
Total $1,625,799
Source: State financial and personnel records
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Art and Historical Artifacts
Finding 1
The Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture
(MCAAHC) did not establish adequate accountability and controls over the
Banneker-Douglas-Tubman Museum’s art and historical artifacts collection.
Analysis
MCAAHC did not establish adequate accountability and controls over the
Banneker-Douglass-Tubman Museum’s art and historical artifacts collection.
According to MCAAHC records as of March 2026, the collection included 291
items valued at approximately $478,000.
Our review disclosed that the two employees responsible for maintaining the
detailed records of MCAAHC’s collection had physical access to the collection.
In addition, MCAAHC did not conduct physical inventories of the collection
during our audit period. Our test of 15 artifacts1 did not identify any items listed
on MCAAHC’s inventory records that could not be accounted for.
These conditions were caused, at least in part, because MCAAHC’s written
procedures did not address the safeguarding, recording, and management of its
collection as required by the Department of General Services’ Inventory Control
Manual. The Manual also requires that sensitive items be inventoried annually,
and that duties for recordkeeping, custody, and physical inventory be adequately
segregated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCAAHC
a. enhance written procedures to ensure the collection is safeguarded,
accurately recorded, and properly managed;
b. ensure that employees who maintain detail records do not have physical
access to the collections; and
c. conduct physical inventories of its collections annually.
We advised MCAAHC on how to achieve the necessary segregation of duties
using existing personnel.
1 Artifacts were selected for testing based on materiality.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Collections
Finding 2
MCAAHC did not establish adequate accountability and control over
collections.
Analysis
MCAAHC did not establish adequate accountability and control over collections.
MCAAHC received checks for private tours of the Museum, special event rentals,
and reimbursement for expenditures paid on behalf of its affiliated foundation.
According to MCAAHC records, collections received between August 2023 and
January 2026 totaled approximately $162,000.
 MCAAHC did not always record collections to establish accountability over
the funds. Specifically, our test of 10 deposits2 containing 21 checks totaling
$145,000, identified 7 checks totaling $125,000 that were not recorded upon
receipt. In addition, checks were handled by at least two employees before
being restrictively endorsed.
 Collections were not always deposited within one working day of receipt.
Specifically, our aforementioned test disclosed that 5 deposits totaling
$16,900 were made between 4 and 142 days after receipt.
 MCAAHC did not independently verify that all collections were deposited.
Specifically, the employee performing the verification was also involved in
the collection process. In addition, this employee did not use the initial
documentation used to record the collections in the verification.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policy and Procedures Manual
requires collections to be restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon
receipt, independently verified to deposit using initial source documents, and
deposited within one working day of receipt.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCAAHC
a. record and restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt,
b. deposit and record all collections in a timely manner, and
c. perform an independent verification of recorded collections to deposits
using initial source documents.
2 We selected days when a tour or special event occurred and material reimbursement requests to
MCAAHC’s affiliated foundation.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Corporate Purchasing Card
Finding 3
MCAAHC did not establish required controls to ensure the propriety of
corporate purchasing card (CPC) transactions.
Analysis
MCAAHC did not establish required controls to ensure the propriety of CPC
transactions. According to State records, MCAAHC had 1 CPC cardholder that
processed 518 transactions totaling approximately $239,000 between July 2022
and January 2026. Our review disclosed that the cardholder did not complete
monthly transaction logs for these purchases and the purchases were not subject to
an independent supervisory review, as required. Finally, MCAAHC did not use
available Level-3 purchasing data3 from the issuing bank to help determine the
propriety of CPC transactions. Our test of 20 CPC transactions4 totaling
approximately $57,000 did not identify any improper purchases.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual requires agencies to record all purchases on the CPC activity
log, perform documented supervisory reviews of cardholder activity, verify
Level-3 data to CPC activity logs, and document monthly reviews of Level-3 data
as part of transaction monitoring.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCAAHC comply with the aforementioned Manual.
Specifically, MCAAHC should
a. ensure CPC cardholders record all purchases on the CPC activity log;
and
b. perform a documented independent supervisory review of all CPC
purchases, including using available Level-3 data to aid in the assessment
of the propriety of purchases and payments.
3 Level-3 data, when reported by merchants, provides detailed purchasing information, including
invoice level line-item details (such as item descriptions and item quantities).
4 Items were generally selected based on materiality and risk.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Commission on
African American History and Culture (MCAAHC) for the period beginning
July 1, 2022 and ending February 17, 2026. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCAAHC’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, corporate
purchasing card activity, cash receipts, grants, payroll, and museum collection
inventories.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2022 to February 17, 2026, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MCAAHC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
9

--- Page 12 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data), the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
We also extracted data from MCAAHC’s internal accounting records for the
purpose of testing certain areas, such as purchases and disbursements and
museum collection inventory. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MCAAHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MCAAHC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCAAHC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
10

--- Page 13 ---
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCAAHC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MCAAHC to our findings and recommendations is included
as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in State Government Article, Section
2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MCAAHC regarding
the results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
July 9, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
On behalf of the Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture (MCAAHC), I
would like to formally acknowledge the completion of the fiscal compliance audit covering the
period beginning July 1, 2022, and ending February 17, 2026. Thank you for the opportunity to
review the draft audit report.
MCAAHC has treated every finding identified in this audit as a priority and acted decisively to
implement targeted corrective actions focused on strengthening internal controls, enhancing our
collections management, reinforcing cash and check handling procedures, and resuming the
Corporate Purchase Card reconciliation activities. Since the conclusion of the Office of Legislative
Audit’s fieldworks, MCAAHC has fully resolved 1 of the 3 findings identified in the report and the
remaining corrective actions for the remaining 2 findings expected to be completed by the end of
2026.
MCAAHC’s detailed responses to each audit finding are enclosed. We sincerely appreciate the
professionalism, diligence, thoroughness, and time invested by your team during the audit.
MCAAHC remains committed to strengthening internal controls and ensuring accountability and
integrity of our agency.
If you have any questions or require additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Chanel C. Johnson
Executive Director

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland Commission on African American
History and Culture
Agency Response Form
Art and Historical Artifacts
Finding 1
The Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture
(MCAAHC) did not establish adequate accountability and controls over the
Banneker-Douglas-Tubman Museum’s art and historical artifacts collection.
We recommend that MCAAHC
a. enhance written procedures to ensure the collection is safeguarded,
accurately recorded, and properly managed;
b. ensure that employees who maintain detail records do not have physical
access to the collections; and
c. conduct physical inventories of its collections annually.
We advised MCAAHC on how to achieve the necessary segregation of duties
using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide While MCAAHC acknowledges that certain practices would benefit from
additional comments as updates, greater formalization, or enhanced documentation, the Museum has
deemed necessary. maintained written collections management policies and procedures for many
years.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Already
Completed
Please provide details of The Museum's Collections Policy states that the Museum holds its collections
corrective action or in trust for the public and is committed to maintaining professional and ethical
explain disagreement. standards while protecting collections from mismanagement, neglect, and
inappropriate deaccessioning. The policy establishes requirements for
acquisitions, documentation, provenance review, inventory control, collections
access, storage, and oversight. In addition, the Museum's Collections
Management Plan includes written procedures governing access to collections
storage areas, including restricted-access classifications, sign-in requirements,
researcher access protocols, supervision requirements, and controls over the
handling and removal of collection items. Public access to collections storage
areas is prohibited, and staff access is limited based on authorized
responsibilities.
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Commission on African American
History and Culture
Agency Response Form
The Museum also maintains documented procedures addressing acquisitions,
provenance verification, legal ownership review, condition assessments,
documentation standards, storage considerations, and stewardship
responsibilities. These procedures are intended to ensure that collections are
properly recorded, managed, secured, and preserved. Further, the Museum's
Digital Photograph Archives Policy establishes requirements for accessioning,
documentation, database management, controlled access, preservation, records
retention, deaccessioning approvals, and disaster recovery measures. The
policy requires the use of accession numbers, database documentation, access
controls, and preservation practices for digital collections.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2026
Please provide details of Management agrees with the intent of strengthening accountability and
corrective action or segregation of duties over the Museum's collections. However, museum
explain disagreement. operations require collections staff responsible for cataloging, accessioning,
inventory management, exhibitions, loans, and collections care to have physical
access to collection objects to perform their professional responsibilities.
To strengthen oversight and mitigate risk, MCAAHC will implement additional
supervisory controls over collections records and inventory activities. Access to
collections records and inventory reports will be reviewed by the Chief
Financial Officer on a periodic basis. Management will review inventory
reconciliations, approve significant record adjustments, and monitor
discrepancies identified during inventory activities. Documentation supporting
acquisitions, loans, object movement, and inventory changes will be
maintained and subject to management review.
These measures will provide independent oversight of collections records while
maintaining the operational access necessary for museum staff to carry out their
collections management responsibilities.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2026
Please provide details of The Museum maintains and updates collection records on an ongoing basis as
corrective action or new acquisitions are accessioned, cataloged, and entered into the collections
explain disagreement. management system. Collection additions are also reviewed and incorporated
into the Museum's insurance records, as appropriate. Accordingly, collection
records are routinely updated throughout the year.
To further strengthen accountability and address the audit recommendation,
MCAAHC will implement a formal annual physical inventory of the Museum's
permanent collection. The annual inventory process will include verification of
the physical existence and location of collection items, reconciliation of
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Commission on African American
History and Culture
Agency Response Form
inventory results with collections records and insurance schedules,
documentation and investigation of any discrepancies identified, review and
approval of inventory results by Museum management, and retention of
inventory records for audit and management purposes.
MCAAHC will develop and maintain written inventory procedures and an
annual inventory schedule to ensure the process is performed consistently and
documented each year. This annual inventory will complement the Museum's
ongoing collections management activities and provide additional assurance
regarding the accountability, safeguarding, and stewardship of collection assets.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Commission on African American
History and Culture
Agency Response Form
Collections
Finding 2
MCAAHC did not establish adequate accountability and control over
collections.
We recommend that MCAAHC
a. record and restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt,
b. deposit and record all collections in a timely manner, and
c. perform an independent verification of recorded collections to deposits
using initial source documents.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The audit identified opportunities to strengthen controls over the receipt,
additional comments as recording, deposit, and reconciliation of collections. Specifically, the audit
deemed necessary. recommended that MCAAHC ensure checks are restrictively endorsed upon
receipt, collections are recorded and deposited in a timely manner, and
recorded collections are independently reconciled to deposits.
MCAAHC recognizes the importance of strong cash receipt controls to
safeguard assets and ensure the accuracy and completeness of financial records.
In response to the recommendations, MCAAHC will enhance its procedures to
strengthen the timeliness and documentation of collection processing and
deposit activities, including the implementation of documented independent
reconciliations of recorded collections to deposits. These actions will further
strengthen accountability and oversight of collections.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2026
Please provide details of Management concurs with the finding and has implemented procedures to
corrective action or ensure that all checks intended for the Special Funds account are restrictively
explain disagreement. endorsed immediately upon receipt. Checks intended for deposit into Special
Funds are promptly stamped with the appropriate bank endorsement
information upon receipt to prevent unauthorized negotiation. Additionally, all
checks received are recorded in a centralized receipt index that documents the
date received, payer information, check number, amount, and intended deposit
account. MCAAHC has implemented these procedures to strengthen internal
controls over cash receipts by providing an audit trail and safeguarding funds
from receipt through deposit.
Checks received that are intended for deposit with the Foundation are
safeguarded in a secure and locked location upon receipt and maintained under
appropriate custody controls until they are transmitted to the Foundation. Each
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Commission on African American
History and Culture
Agency Response Form
transfer of checks is accompanied by a signed transmittal list that details the
relevant check information, including the payer, check number, amount, and
date received. This process provides accountability, supports reconciliation,
and ensures a documented chain of custody from receipt through delivery to the
Foundation.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
March 2026
Please provide details of Management has established procedures to ensure that all collections are
corrective action or recorded and deposited in a timely manner. Upon receipt, collections are
explain disagreement. promptly documented and prepared for deposit. Deposits are processed in
accordance with established cash-handling procedures and applicable policies
to minimize the time funds are held on-site. Checks and cash intended for
deposit are kept in a secured and locked funds box before being deposited
promptly. These controls help ensure the accuracy and completeness of
financial records while safeguarding assets and reducing the risk of loss or
misappropriation.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
March 2026
Please provide details of Management performs an independent verification of recorded collections and
corrective action or related deposits as part of its internal control procedures. One staff member is
explain disagreement. responsible for recording collections, while a separate staff member
independently reviews and verifies that the amounts recorded agree to the
amounts deposited. Any discrepancies identified during the review are
promptly investigated and resolved. This segregation of duties helps ensure the
accuracy and completeness of cash receipt records and strengthens controls
over the collection and deposit process.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Commission on African American
History and Culture
Agency Response Form
Corporate Purchasing Card
Finding 3
MCAAHC did not establish required controls to ensure the propriety of
corporate purchasing card (CPC) transactions.
We recommend that MCAAHC comply with the aforementioned Manual.
Specifically, MCAAHC should
a. ensure CPC cardholders record all purchases on the CPC activity log;
and
b. perform a documented independent supervisory review of all CPC
purchases, including using available Level-3 data to aid in the assessment
of the propriety of purchases and payments.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The lapse in Corporate Purchase Card (CPC) reconciliation activities was
additional comments as temporary and occurred during a period of staff turnover within the department.
deemed necessary. At the same time, the State of Maryland implemented changes to the process
used for distributing and accessing CPC statements, which affected the timely
availability of documentation needed to complete reconciliations. These
concurrent events have contributed to delays in performing reconciliation
procedures. Management is taking steps to address the backlog and restore
timely reconciliation practices. Management remains committed to maintaining
compliance with CPC reconciliation requirements and strengthening controls to
prevent similar delays in the future.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2026
Please provide details of Management concurs with the recommendation and will reinforce requirements
corrective action or for all Corporate Purchase Card (CPC) cardholders to record purchases on a
explain disagreement. CPC activity log. Per the Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing
Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual cardholders are required to
document each transaction promptly and maintain supporting documentation in
accordance with established policies and procedures. Supervisors and
designated reviewers will monitor compliance with this requirement as part of
the monthly reconciliation and review process. These measures are intended to
improve the completeness and accuracy of CPC records and strengthen
accountability for cardholder transactions.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2026
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Commission on African American
History and Culture
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Management concurs with the recommendation and will implement procedures
corrective action or to ensure a documented independent supervisory review of all Corporate
explain disagreement. Purchase Card (CPC) transactions. A supervisor independent of the purchasing
function will review CPC purchases and supporting documentation to verify
that transactions are appropriate, properly authorized, and comply with
applicable policies and procedures. As part of this review, available Level-3
transaction data will be utilized to provide enhanced detail regarding items
purchased and to assist in assessing the propriety of purchases and related
payments. Evidence of the review is documented and retained as part of the
CPC reconciliation records to support accountability and strengthen internal
controls.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Dianne P. Ramirez
Senior Auditor
Samantha J. Rhea
Staff Auditor