Title: Maryland Department of Health - Pharmacy Services
Date: 2026-07-13
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a58f669913fffef8b1e06d3
Extracted: 2026-07-20T11:59:16.965071
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
July 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted a reference to cybersecurity information from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 13, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) pharmacy services for the period beginning January 1, 2023 to
October 15, 2025. MDH provides pharmacy services under the Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA) and the Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration (PHPA) as indicated through the following five programs:
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program (MCPA)
 Medicaid Managed Care Program (MCPA)
 Kidney Disease Program (PHPA)
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (PHPA)
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program (PHPA)
Our audit disclosed that MDH did not audit pharmacy activities for three of the
four fee-for-service programs to identify policy and billing violations as well as
any potential fraud, waste, or abuse. These three programs collectively accounted
for approximately $674.5 million (95 percent) of the total $710.2 million in fee-
for-service pharmacy claims paid in fiscal year 2025. This condition was noted in
our two prior audit reports dating back to 2020 but not corrected.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of MCPA and PHPA, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our
finding and related recommendations and will notify MDH of any needed
clarification to ensure the response sufficiently addresses the related finding.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MCPA and PHPA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH), through its Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA) and Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
(PHPA), operates four significant fee-for-service programs under which it pays
for prescription drugs to eligible recipients. In addition, MCPA contracts with
nine Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) which are responsible for paying
pharmacy claims under the Medicaid Managed Care Program.
MCPA
MCPA administers two programs with pharmacy services:
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program (MMPP) – provides pharmacy
services through a fee-for-service business model to Maryland Medicaid
recipients. MMPP has oversight of all policies and operations related to the
pharmacy services such as claim processing, preferred drug listing, and
reimbursement methodology. MMPP covers all point-of-sale pharmacy
services for fee-for-service recipients, as well as point-of-sale pharmacy
services for MCO recipients for drugs that are not covered by the MCOs.
 MCOs – provide pharmacy services to Medicaid recipients enrolled in the
Medicaid Managed Care Program. Each MCO independently contracted with
one of four Pharmacy Benefit Managers that were responsible for
administering virtually all aspects of the MCO pharmacy activities including
pharmacy network management, claims processing, and payments to the
pharmacies.
PHPA
PHPA administers three programs with pharmacy services:
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (MADAP) – helps low to
moderate-income Maryland residents with HIV disease who have limited or
no coverage from private insurance or Medicare, pay for HIV/AIDS related
drugs. Individuals cannot be enrolled in both Medicaid and MADAP.
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program (BCCDTP) –
provides breast cancer and cervical cancer diagnostic, treatment, and
pharmacy services to eligible low-income Maryland residents.
3

--- Page 6 ---
 Kidney Disease Program (KDP) – helps eligible low to moderate-income
Maryland residents pay for the treatment costs associated with end-stage renal
disease. KDP is a payer of last resort after all other options, such as private
insurance, Medicare, and Medicaid have been exhausted.
Pharmacy Rebates
Certain drugs reimbursed under these programs and by the MCOs were eligible
for drug manufacturer rebates. MDH received rebates totaling approximately
$386 million for its fee-for-service pharmacy purchases during fiscal year 2025,
and $517.7 million for pharmacy purchases made by MCOs during calendar year
2025. The rebate amount is based on the total cost of the drug regardless of the
portion paid by MDH, which resulted in MADAP and KDP receiving rebates in
excess of the amounts paid.
The scope of this audit included the administration and monitoring of claims
adjudication and processing, security and controls, reimbursement rates, audits,
and rebate management under the aforementioned four fee-for-service programs.
Additionally, the scope included MCPA’s rebate management and monitoring of
pharmacy services provided by the MCOs under the Medicaid Managed Care
Program. MCPA’s monitoring of other aspects of the Managed Care Program,
including calculations of MCO capitation rates and processing of capitation
payments, are included within the scope of our audit of MCPA’s Managed Care
Program. According to MDH records, fiscal year 2025 claim payments for the
four fee-for-service programs totaled approximately $710.2 million (see Figure
1).
Figure 1
Fiscal Year 2025 Fee-For-Service Claims and Rebates by Program
Number Number
Claim Rebates Net
Program of of
Payments Received Payments
Recipients Claims
MMPP 349,684 5,326,568 $670,929,575 $334,702,122 $336,227,453
MADAP 5,167 84,320 35,736,294 48,253,258 (12,516,964)
BCCDTP 322 2,240 3,231,206 2,671,552 559,654
KDP 408 8,094 320,421 340,936 (20,515)
Total 355,581 5,421,222 $710,217,496 $385,967,868 $324,249,628
Source: MDH records
4

--- Page 7 ---
Pharmacy Vendor
MDH has contracted with the same pharmacy vendor to provide a point-of-sale
electronic claims management system (pharmacy vendor system) since 2006. The
current contract covers the period from January 2020 to July 2029 at a total cost
of $72.4 million (including renewal options). The contract included the creation
of a new pharmacy vendor system, which was implemented in October 2022.
The pharmacy vendor system includes pharmacy claims processing, where claims
are adjudicated in real time for MMPP, MADAP, BCCDTP, and KDP. While
each MCO has their own system to process pharmacy claims, the pharmacy
vendor system is used to perform rebate processing for MCO pharmacy claims.
Claims processing includes functionality such as verifications of recipient
eligibility, reviewing requests for prior authorizations, and identifying other
parties (such as private insurers) that may be responsible for payment.
Furthermore, the system performs drug utilization reviews and supports drug
manufacturer rebate programs by capturing and reporting drug utilization activity
so that MDH can obtain rebates from drug manufacturers.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 9, 2024. See Figure 2 for the results of
our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Medical Care Programs Administration
(MCPA) did not ensure manually processed
Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
Finding 1 Not repeated
(MMPP) claims were proper, resulting in
overpayments of approximately $397,000
related to 11 of the 15 claims we tested.
MDH did not have procedures to ensure that
Finding 2 prescribing providers were licensed prior to Not repeated
approving pharmacy claims for payment.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MDH did not audit three of the four fee-for-
service programs’ pharmacy claims, did not
Repeated
Finding 3 analyze claim reversals, and did not use
(Current Finding 1)
available drug utilization data to identify
improper claims.
MDH did not ensure that drug manufacturers
Finding 4 provided timely and proper MADAP drug Not repeated
rebate payments.
Finding 5 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status redacted1
Findings and Recommendations
Claims Processing
Finding 1
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) did not audit pharmacy claims for
three of the four fee-for-service programs that collectively accounted for
approximately $674.5 million in fiscal year 2025 claims.
Analysis
MDH did not audit pharmacy activity for the Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy
Program (MMPP), Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program
(BCCDTP), and the Kidney Disease Program (KDP). According to MDH
records, these programs collectively accounted for approximately $674.5 million
(95 percent) of the total $710.2 million paid in fiscal year 2025 for fee-for-service
program pharmacy claims. Industry best practices provide that pharmacy claims
should be audited on a routine basis.
Pharmacy audits would identify policy and billing violations as well as any
potential fraud, waste, or abuse. In this regard, audits of the Maryland AIDS
1 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
have been redacted from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Drug Assistance Program (MADAP) activity for calendar years 2021 through
2023 identified claims totaling $840,000 that needed to be recovered. In addition,
the audits would enable MDH to verify information that is not possible through
the pharmacy vendor system, such as ensuring prescriptions were actually picked
up by the recipient. State regulations require pharmacies to reverse the charges
(and reimburse the State) when prescriptions are not picked up within 14 days of
the claim submission.
Our analysis of MMPP claims data for the audit period (totaling $1.8 billion)
disclosed that numerous MMPP pharmacies had a reversal rate that was
significantly below the program average of 23 percent.2 For example, 172
pharmacies with $161.7 million in paid net claims during the audit period
reversed less than 5 percent of their claims. According to the United States
Government Accountability Office (GAO), while there may be legitimate reasons
for a pharmacy to have a low percentage of claim reversals, such pharmacies may
warrant a follow-up review.3
Similar conditions were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to August 2020. MDH’s response to our prior report, on behalf of
MCPA and PHPA, indicated that the Office of the Inspector General for Health4
(OIGH) would audit each program’s pharmacy claims, including a review of
pharmacies with below average reversal rates. However, in October 2025, OIGH
notified MDH that it could not perform compliance functions on MDH’s behalf
and consequently did not perform any of these audits.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to periodically audit each program’s pharmacy
claims on a test basis (repeat), and
b. investigate the aforementioned pharmacies with below average reversals
and take appropriate follow-up action (repeat).
2 We did not review reversal rates for the other three fee-for-service programs given the lesser
claims activity.
3 A July 2015 GAO report on Medicaid titled ‘Additional Reporting May Help CMS Oversee
Prescription-Drug Fraud Controls’ noted that pharmacies with too few or too many adjustments
may be a red flag for concern.
4 Effective July 1, 2022, Chapter 325, Laws of Maryland 2021 established the OIGH as an
independent unit of the State and transferred certain funding and staff from the then existing
MDH Office of Inspector General to the new OIGH.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) pharmacy services for the period beginning January 1, 2023 and
ending October 15, 2025. The audit focuses on pharmacy services provided by
MDH through five separate programs of which two are in the Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA) and three are in the Prevention and Health
Promotion Administration (PHPA):
MCPA
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
PHPA
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistant Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program
 Kidney Disease Program
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDH’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included claims adjudication and processing, manual
overrides, rate setting, program monitoring and audits, rebate processing, and
information systems security and control. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA and PHPA
by MDH. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of
our audit of the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, our
8

--- Page 11 ---
audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance and programs and an
assessment of MDH’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDH.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 1, 2023 to October 15, 2025, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDH’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
We also extracted data from the Medicaid Management Information System (such
as claim payments) for the purpose of selecting test items and performing data
analytics. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
9

--- Page 12 ---
MDH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDH, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to MDH that did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity information before a
report is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity information – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain information in this report
falls under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report
all specifics as to the nature of this cybersecurity information has been redacted.
10

--- Page 13 ---
We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and government auditing
standards, support the redaction of this information from the public audit report.
The specifics of the cybersecurity information have been communicated to MDH
and those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations in an unredacted
audit report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of MCPA and PHPA, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of June 2026 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
1 06/05/26
Centers  The Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
2 Medical Care Programs Administration Medical Care Programs Administration 05/20/26
3 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/19/26
Managed Care Program, known as
Medical Care Programs Administration –
4 HealthChoice including oversight of the 01/14/26
Managed Care Program
nine private Managed Care Organizations
Behavioral Health Administration and  Behavioral Health Administration
Medical Care Programs Administration -  Medical Care Programs Administration
5 10/03/25
Administrative Service Organization for Administrative Service Organization
Behavioral Health Services for Behavioral Health Services
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institutes for Children and Children and Adolescents
6 08/25/25
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
Developmental Disabilities
7 Developmental Disabilities Administration 06/18/25
Administration
 22 Health Professional Boards and
8 Regulatory Services Commissions 04/09/25
 The Office of Health Care Quality
9 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 03/19/25
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
 Office of Population Health
Prevention and Health Promotion Improvement
Administration – Office of Population  Office of Preparedness and Response
10 Health Improvement – Office of  Office of Provider Engagement and 08/09/24
Preparedness and Response – Office of Regulation – Office of Controlled
Provider Engagement and Regulation Substances Administration
 Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulations – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
12

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of June 2026 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
11 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 06/05/24
 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
 Eastern Shore Hospital Center
12 State Psychiatric Hospital Centers  Spring Grove Hospital Center 05/29/24
 Springfield Hospital Center
 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review Commission
13 Health Regulatory Commissions 01/25/24
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director for
Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
14 Office of the Secretary and Other Units Disabilities 10/19/23
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing
and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
 Deer’s Head Center Care
15 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX
July 10, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of
Health – Pharmacy Services for the period beginning October 1, 2021 to October 31, 2025.
MDH appreciates OLA’s efforts and collaboration throughout the audit process. We also note
OLA’s prior audit on MDH Pharmacy Services, issued in 2024, included 5 findings, 4 of which
have been fully resolved. The audit report identified one finding, repeated from 2024. This
finding is being treated as a priority, with targeted actions that MDH will address through a
contract modification with the current pharmacy vendor to provide auditing services.
The pharmacy claims processing system currently utilized by the Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy
Program (MMPP) includes automated, multi-layered safeguards designed to intercept and
prevent improper payments before disbursement occurs. By embedding programmatic safeguards
directly into the point-of-sale workflow—including real-time Third Party Liability verification
for Coordination of Benefits, mandatory clinical criteria screenings, and automated quantity
caps—the system systematically identifies, pauses, or rejects non-compliant or atypical claims at
submission. These proactive, customized software filters ensure that state funds are not released
for unauthorized utilization or to inactive providers, maintaining fiscal oversight that mitigates
systemic risk and enforces compliance with statutory plan limitations.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Meena Seshamani, M.D., Ph.D.
Secretary
Enclosures

--- Page 17 ---
cc: Kate Wolff, MPA, Chief of Staff, MDH
Emily Berg, Deputy Chief of Staff, MDH
Perrie Briskin, Deputy Secretary for Healthcare Financing and Medicaid Director
Liz Schuelke, Chief of Staff
Meg Sullivan, Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services
Martine Gordan, Chief of Staff, MDH
David Davis, Director of Operations
Clint Hackett, Deputy Secretary for Operations, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, Internal Controls, Audit
Compliance & Information Security, MDH
Carlean Rhames-Jowers, Chief Auditor, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
2

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
Agency Response Form
Claims Processing
Finding 1
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) did not audit pharmacy claims for
three of the four fee-for-service programs that collectively accounted for
approximately $674.5 million in fiscal year 2025 claims.
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to periodically audit each program’s pharmacy
claims on a test basis (repeat), and
b. investigate the aforementioned pharmacies with below average reversals
and take appropriate follow-up action (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide As cited in the discussion notes, it is important to note in OLA’s
additional comments as prior report, published in 2024, that MDH indicated the Office of the
deemed necessary. Inspector General for Health (OIGH) would audit each program’s
pharmacy claims, including a review of pharmacies with below average
reversal rates. However, MDH was later informed that the resources
were not available for OIGH to perform these audits, and that these
audits could not be performed by another entity at that time. Since
receiving this notice, MDH has developed a contingency plan to replace
OIGH audit support.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2027
Please provide details of As OLA stated, the programs audited collectively paid $674.5 million for
corrective action or fee for service pharmacy claims for FY2025. MDH notes that this does
explain disagreement. not necessarily represent any improper payments.
The pharmacy claims processing system currently utilized by the
Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program (MMPP) is an automated
computer system that instantly checks prescription claims before they are
approved for payment. This system provides multiple Prospective Drug
Utilization Review edits, or automated rules and filter logic in the
software, that have been customized for the MMPP to identify improper
claims and immediate pause or reject claims.
These edits include:
● Maximum quantity allowed for each specific drug
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
Agency Response Form
● Strict caps set by the health department on how much of a
specific medicine a patient can get
● Specific clinical criteria,
● Medications that cost over a certain dollar amount, which require
a special review before approval.
These edits provide the ability to identify and deny atypical claims and
determine over-utilization and claim rejection based on the plan
limitations. The system also provides safeguards to prohibit
inappropriate submission or payment of claims if the pharmacy provider
was not an active MPP Provider at time of service.
Further, the system performs Coordination of Benefits (COB)
electronically by reviewing all eligible claims in real time. When a
pharmacy submits a prescription claim to Maryland Medicaid, the
adjudication system automatically screens the participant’s profile in real
time to determine if the participant has any other active primary
commercial health insurance, Medicare, or workers' compensation.
If the system detects that a primary insurance exists (Third Party
Liability), it will not pay the claim. Instead, the system issues a denial.
The necessary information, including payer and participant data, is
communicated back to the Pharmacy Provider. The pharmacy provider
must update the patient's profile, bill the primary commercial insurance
first, and then route the remaining balance (such as copays or
deductibles) back to Maryland Medicaid as secondary.
In addition to these safeguards against improper payments, MDH agrees
with the industry best practice recommendation on pharmacy audits.
MDH has determined that it is in the best interest of the state to use an
existing contract vehicle to support this work versus a new solicitation of
a new RFP to specifically conduct the audits. To establish these
procedures with a modification to an existing contract vehicle the
following steps need to take place:
● By September 1, 2026 MDH will draft a scope of work to outline
the requirements for an external contractor to conduct regular
audits to periodically audit samples of pharmacy claims for
MMPP.
● By September 15, 2026 MDH will share the scope of work with
the existing pharmacy vendor and negotiate with them to provide
the Department with a cost proposal by November 1, 2026.
● MDH will work with state partners to determine a feasible
funding path. Once funding is identified, MDH will work to
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Pharmacy Services
Agency Response Form
modify the current contract with the vendor for the addition
of audit services and present this modification to BPW for
approval.
● Pending funding availability, MDH anticipates the contract
modification to be live by July 1, 2027.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2027
Please provide details of As OLA notes, and MDH agrees, according to the United States
corrective action or Government Accountability Office, while there may be legitimate
explain disagreement. reasons for a pharmacy to have a low percentage of claim reversals, such
pharmacies may warrant a follow-up review.
MDH agrees with the industry best practice recommendation on
pharmacy audits. MDH has determined that it is in the best interest of the
state to use an existing contract vehicle to support this work versus a new
solicitation of a new RFP to specifically conduct the audits. To establish
these procedures with a modification to an existing contract vehicle the
following steps need to take place:
● By September 1, 2026, MDH will draft a scope of work to
outline the requirements for an external contractor to conduct
regular audits to periodically audit samples of pharmacy claims
for MMPP.
● By September 15, 2026, MDH will share the scope of work with
the existing pharmacy vendor and negotiate with them to provide
the Department with a cost proposal by November 1, 2026.
● MDH will work with state partners to determine a feasible
funding path. Once funding is identified, MDH will work to
modify the current contract with the vendor for the addition
of audit services and present this modification to BPW for
approval.
● Pending funding availability, MDH anticipates the contract
modification to be live by July 1, 2027.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
James M. Fowler, CFE
Principal Auditor
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Jessica L. Carroll
Jacob M. Kasten
Zain Khalid
John E. Rooney
Staff Auditors