Title: Department of Human Services - Family Investment Administration
Date: 2026-07-15
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a5a83be36356b392e031b82
Extracted: 2026-07-27T12:08:31.484666
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
July 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 15, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human Services
(DHS) – Family Investment Administration (FIA) for the period beginning
June 1, 2021 and ending February 28, 2025. FIA oversees several public assistance
programs administered by the 24 local departments of social services (LDSSs).
These programs include the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP),
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA), Temporary Disability Assistance Program
(TDAP), and the home energy assistance programs. According to DHS’ records,
payments made during fiscal year 2025 for programs under FIA’s oversight totaled
approximately $1.9 billion.
Our audit disclosed that FIA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that
the LDSSs properly determined eligibility for public assistance programs and the
related benefits. As a result, we noted instances where the LDSSs did not maintain
required documentation or properly determine recipients’ benefits. Additionally, FIA
did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and appropriate follow-up of
questionable recipient eligibility identified by its computer matches, resulting in
improper or questionable benefit payments, including one individual that continued to
receive public assistance after winning $2 million in the lottery.
Our audit also disclosed that FIA did not have an effective process to identify
recipients who were incarcerated resulting in 1,858 recipients receiving SNAP
and TCA benefits while incarcerated. Although FIA performed matches using
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services records, the data used by
FIA was not complete, reducing the effectiveness of the match. For example, our
test of 20 recipients we determined were incarcerated found 15 had not been
identified by FIA and 5 had been identified but did not have benefits terminated
timely.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit further noted that FIA did not ensure the LDSSs had a documented
hardship exemption and family independence plan for TCA recipients receiving
benefits for more than five years as required by federal and State regulations. In
addition, our audit disclosed that FIA did not ensure LDSS Medicaid eligibility
determinations were timely and proper, potentially resulting in payments on behalf
of ineligible individuals. Our review identified $7.1 million in Medicaid claims
paid for 546 recipients after their redetermination due date and instances where
eligibility determinations by the LDSSs were improper.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under the
referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were previously
communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
We also received a referral on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline that DHS
management may have intentionally manipulated the error rate to enable the State
to defer the increased State contribution for SNAP costs imposed by the One Big
Beautiful Bill Act of 2025. Although we were unable to substantiate the allegation,
we found that FIA did not take sufficient action to reduce the Maryland SNAP error
rate resulting in penalties totaling $28 million being assessed on the State.
Finally, our audit disclosed that DHS did not properly award its Electronic Benefits
Transfer (EBT) Services contract which delayed the implementation of secure chip
technology that could have reduced or mitigated stolen EBT claims paid by the
State. In addition, FIA did not adequately monitor certain other contracts and
agreements.
DHS’ response to this audit, on behalf of FIA, is included as an appendix to this
report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of DHS’ response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding. In accordance with State law, we have
reviewed the response and, while DHS generally agrees with the recommendations
in this report, we identified certain instances in which statements in the response
disagree or appear to be inconsistent with a report finding and recommendation. In
each instance we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed
the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within DHS’ response
2

--- Page 5 ---
to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with DHS.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by FIA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Public Assistance Programs
* Finding 1 – The Family Investment Administration (FIA) did not have 12
comprehensive procedures to ensure that the Local Departments of
Social Services (LDSSs) properly determined eligibility for public
assistance programs it administered.
* Finding 2 – FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and 15
appropriate follow-up on instances of questionable recipient eligibility
identified by its computer matches.
Finding 3 – FIA did not have complete data to identify recipients who 16
were incarcerated and did not ensure proper action was taken when
incarcerated recipients were identified resulting in 1,858 recipients
continuing to receive Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) and/or Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) benefits while
incarcerated.
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 17
Finding 5 – FIA did not ensure the LDSSs had a documented hardship 18
exemption and family independence plan for TCA recipients receiving
benefits for more than five years in accordance with federal and State
regulations.
Finding 6 – FIA did not conduct required reviews of LDSSs to ensure 19
Medicaid eligibility determinations and redeterminations were timely,
proper, and supported potentially resulting in payments on behalf of
ineligible individuals.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 7 – FIA did not take sufficient action to reduce the Maryland 19
SNAP error rate resulting in penalties totaling $28 million being
assessed on the State.
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 8 – The Department of Human Services improperly awarded 21
the Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) Services contract, which
delayed the implementation of secure chip technology that could have
reduced or mitigated stolen EBT claims paid by the State.
* Finding 9 – FIA did not adequately monitor certain contracts and 23
agreements related to its public assistance programs to ensure that
services were provided and related payments were supported.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 24
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Family Investment Administration (FIA) is a unit of the Department of
Human Services (DHS) and oversees a number of public assistance programs that
are administered statewide by the 24 local departments of social services
(LDSSs).1 While the LDSSs are responsible for the daily operations, State law
requires FIA to supervise the public assistance activities of the LDSSs. FIA
administers several public assistance programs, which are funded through a
combination of State and federal funds2 including the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA), Temporary
Disability Assistance Program (TDAP), and home energy assistance programs.
According to State records, FIA expenditures totaled approximately $401.3
million during fiscal year 2025 (see Figure 1). During the period from June 30,
2021 to June 30, 2025, FIA had vacancy rates that ranged from 10 to 19 percent.
As of June 30, 2025, approximately 10 percent of the total 210 positions were
vacant. These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in
this report.
1 LDSSs administer a number of programs for FIA as well as other units of DHS. The LDSSs are
audited separately during our audits of DHS – Local Department Operations.
2 SNAP is entirely funded with federal funds.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
FIA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 188
Vacant 22
Total 210
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages & Fringe Benefits $ 23,283,843
Technical and Special Fees 1,401,009
Operating Expenses 376,577,328
Total $401,262,180
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 27,433,942
Special Fund 134,651,550
Federal Fund 239,176,688
Total $401,262,180
Source: State financial and personnel records
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline that DHS
management may have intentionally manipulated the SNAP error rate to enable
the State to defer the increased contribution costs imposed by the One Big
Beautiful Bill Act of 2025. Although we were unable to substantiate the
allegation, we found that FIA did not take sufficient action to reduce Maryland’s
SNAP error rate, resulting in penalties of $28 million being assessed on the State,
as further described in Finding 7. Our review did not identify any matters that
warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the ten findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 21, 2022. See Figure 2 for the results
of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
FIA inadvertently disabled a critical system control resulting
Finding 1 in SNAP benefits being awarded to applicants whose income Not repeated
exceeded the federally-established income thresholds.
FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving TCA
Finding 2 benefits beyond the five years allowed by federal and State Not repeated
regulations.
FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance reviews
of TCA cases to ensure that eligibility determinations and
related benefits were proper. In addition, FIA did not ensure
Finding 3 Not repeated
that errors identified through the Temporary Disability
Assistance Program (TDAP) quality assurance reviews were
corrected timely.
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs maintained application
Repeated
Finding 4 documentation to support the propriety of SNAP, TCA, and
(Current Finding 1)
TDAP eligibility determinations and other requirements.
FIA did not always determine whether TCA applicants
Repeated
Finding 5 received unemployment income, as required by federal
(Current Finding 1)
regulations.
FIA did not ensure that all social security number alerts were
Finding 6 recorded in Clients’ Automated Resource and Eligibility Not repeated
System (CARES) for follow-up purposes.
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and
appropriate follow-up on Public Assistance Reporting
Repeated
Finding 7 Information System alerts. Our review disclosed that the
(Current Finding 2)
LDSSs did not take timely or appropriate action for 43 of the
46 alerts we tested.
FIA did not conduct monitoring reviews of certain local
Finding 8 administering agencies in accordance with its policy and did Not repeated
not always execute agreements with energy suppliers.
FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and Repeated
Finding 9
agreements related to its public assistance programs. (Current Finding 9)
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
FIA did not obtain supporting documentation to support grant
Finding 10 Not repeated
funds were spent as intended.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Public Assistance Programs
Background
According to the Department of Human Services (DHS) records, during fiscal
year 2025, programs under the Family Investment Administration’s (FIA)
jurisdiction provided approximately $1.9 billion in benefits to an average of 1
million recipients3 (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
Fiscal Year 2025
Public Assistance Program Recipient and Expenditure Data
Average Annual
Program Monthly Expenditures
Recipients (in Millions)
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) 681,165 $1,486
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) 50,088 158
Home Energy Assistance 298,610 168
Temporary Disability Assistance Program (TDAP) 12,693 58
Other Assistance Programs 2,424 11
Total 1,044,980 $1,881
Source: DHS records
 SNAP – helps low-income households buy food. Applicants must meet
certain financial (such as income not exceeding federal thresholds) and
technical requirements (such as Maryland Resident, US Citizen, or
Qualified Immigrant).
 TCA – provides cash assistance to families with dependent children when
available resources do not fully address the family’s needs. Eligible
families must meet financial and technical requirements and develop a
plan for independence with their case manager.
 Home Energy Assistance – provides bill payment assistance to low-
income households to make their energy costs more affordable and help
with the prevention of loss and the restoration of home energy services.
3 The totals in Figure 3 include individual recipients who are enrolled in one or more programs
because many recipients receive assistance from multiple programs.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 TDAP – provides cash assistance to low-income, disabled Marylanders.
Individuals and families apply for these programs through the State’s Local
Departments of Social Services (LDSSs), which are responsible for ensuring
applicants meet all financial and technical eligibility criteria. The LDSSs record
recipient data for SNAP, TCA, and TDAP in DHS’ Eligibility and Enrollment
(E&E) System which automatically calculates the monthly benefit amount.
Generally, benefits are based on household size and income. Recipients of these
programs access their monthly benefits via an electronic benefit transfer (EBT)
card administered by a vendor under contract with FIA. Recipient data for the
home energy assistance programs is recorded in a separate computer system, and
benefits are paid directly by FIA to energy suppliers or the recipients.
The LDSSs are also responsible for determining Medicaid eligibility for certain
recipients. Medicaid is administered by the Maryland Department of Health’s
(MDH) Medical Care Programs Administration. MDH maintains a separate
automated benefits system (MMIS II) to process Medicaid benefits.
Finding 1
FIA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that the LDSSs
properly determined eligibility for public assistance programs it
administered.
Analysis
FIA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that the LDSSs properly
determined eligibility for public assistance programs. According to FIA records,
the LDSSs collectively processed approximately 964,000 applications for its
major benefit programs during fiscal year 2025.
 FIA did not require the LDSSs to conduct independent supervisory reviews of
eligibility determinations. As a result, FIA did not identify multiple instances
of recipient eligibility determinations that did not have required
documentation and improperly calculated benefits as detailed below.
 FIA did not ensure the LDSSs maintained required documentation to support
eligibility determinations for approved cases. We tested 90 cases4 approved
during fiscal years 2022 through 2026 with average monthly payments for
4 The SNAP, TCA, and TDAP items were selected based on the value of benefits received, and/or
the dates of the application and redetermination process. The Medical Assistance (MA) items
were selected based on the consumer’s eligibility determination date and Medicaid coverage
group. The Office of Home Energy Program (OHEP) items were selected based on the value of
the payment and the type/risk factor of payment, such as direct payments and bulk fuel payments.
12

--- Page 15 ---
TCA, SNAP, and TDAP ranging from $369 to $1,699. Our test disclosed that
supporting documentation (see Figure 4) was not scanned into the related
benefit system for 40 cases as required to support the propriety of the
eligibility.
Figure 4
Missing Documentation Noted During OLA Casefile Review
Number of Missing Documents
Type of Document
TCA SNAP TDAP MA OHEP
Case Files Reviewed: 15 30 10 20 15
Case Files Missing Documents: 15 5 1 17 2
Eligibility Documents
Application 0 0 1 1 1
Social Security Number /
0 2 1 5 1
Immigration Verification
Criminal Record Verification 6 4 N/A N/A N/A
Substance Abuse Screening 6 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Employment Verification 8 1 1 12 1
Income Verification 8 1 1 13 2
Asset Verification N/A N/A N/A 17 N/A
Physicians Medical Report N/A N/A 0 N/A N/A
Other Required Documents
Family Independence Plan 8 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Child Support Agreement 9 N/A N/A N/A N/A
N/A – attribute not applicable for this program.
 FIA did not ensure applicant income was accurately recorded resulting in 11
of the 20 SNAP recipients tested5 being awarded improper benefits or being
improperly denied benefits. Specifically, the wages recorded for 10
individuals’ eligibility determinations were less than the recipient’s actual
wages based on supporting documentation. For example, 4 recipients with
monthly wages ranging from $4,524 to $13,764, had no wages recorded in the
E&E system. According to State records as of November 2025, these 10
recipients have received benefits totaling $95,434 since becoming eligible. In
addition, 1 individual was subsequently denied benefits because the recorded
5 Items were selected for testing based on a match with available State payroll records and the
value of benefits received.
13

--- Page 16 ---
wages overstated their actual monthly wages by $1.3 million. We could not
readily determine the lost benefits that were due to this individual.
 FIA did not always determine whether TCA applicants received
unemployment income (UI) as required by federal regulations.6 Our test of 15
TCA recipients7 disclosed FIA could not document that it performed some of
the required UI verifications for 6 recipients. For example, for 4 recipients,
FIA performed a UI verification during the initial application but did not
perform a verification during the first three months that benefits were
received. We obtained UI records from the Maryland Department of Labor
for these 6 recipients and noted that weekly UI benefits ranging from $300 to
$430 had not been recorded in the E&E system. According to State records,
as of October 2025 these 6 recipients had received TCA benefits totaling
$16,107 while also receiving UI benefits. We could not readily determine the
extent of any overpayments due to UI benefits not being considered for these
recipients.
Similar conditions regarding the maintenance of required documentation by the
LDSSs and verification of UI benefits were commented upon in our preceding
audit report. DHS’ response, on behalf of FIA, to that report indicated that as of
January 2023 they would ensure that the LDSSs scan all documentation to support
the propriety of eligibility determinations and by December 2022 verify
unemployment compensation as required. As noted above, FIA had still not
implemented sufficient procedures to ensure the LDSSs maintain required
documentation and verified UI received by TCA applicants.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FIA
a. establish comprehensive procedures, including supervisory reviews, to
ensure the LDSSs properly determined eligibility for public assistance
programs and the related benefits;
b. ensure that the LDSSs properly record and scan all documentation as
required to support the propriety of eligibility determinations (repeat);
c. verify unemployment compensation as required by federal regulations,
maintain documentation of the related results, and identify and record
unemployment income for TCA recipients, including those noted above
(repeat); and
6 Federal regulations require a verification of unemployment income at the time of application and
for each of the first three months benefits are received.
7 Test items were selected from a match between TCA recipients between fiscal years 2023 and
2025 and unemployment insurance benefit records for the same period.
14

--- Page 17 ---
d. obtain the missing documents noted in our finding and take corrective
action for any unsupported eligibility determinations, improper
payments, or other program requirements (repeat).
Finding 2
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and appropriate follow-
up on instances of questionable recipient eligibility identified by its computer
matches.
Analysis
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and appropriate follow-up on
instances of questionable recipient eligibility identified by its computer matches.
FIA performs computer matches between the E&E system and outside data
sources including the federal Public Assistance Reporting Information System
(PARIS), Vital Statistics Administration death records, and State Lottery and
Gaming Control Agency records. The match results are then forwarded to the
LDSS to investigate to help ensure recipients are eligible for benefits and to detect
potential fraud.8 According to FIA computer match results, there were 7,705
PARIS alerts received in December 2024, and 366 lottery alerts and 600 death
alerts received between June 2024 and February 2025.
Our review disclosed FIA did not verify the results of the LDSS investigations to
ensure the LDSSs took proper and timely action, such as terminating the
recipients’ benefits. In this regard, our test of 30 lottery and death alerts9
disclosed that the LDSSs did not terminate benefits totaling approximately
$115,000 timely for recipients associated with 13 alerts. Specifically, seven
recipients were still receiving benefits as of February 2026 and the other six
recipients’ benefits were terminated between 3.6 months and 5.4 months after the
related alert. For example, a July 2023 match identified a recipient who won $2
million in the lottery but the LDSS had not terminated the individual’s benefits as
of February 2026. The recipient received $9,000 subsequent to the date of the
lottery alert. In addition, our test of 20 PARIS alerts disclosed the LDSSs did not
document the actions taken to resolve 9 alerts, such as closing the case in one
state and recouping the benefits, resulting in questionable benefits totaling
$37,000.
8 Federal regulations provide that a household shall lose eligibility for benefits immediately upon
receipt of substantial lottery winnings. According to guidance from the United States
Department of Agriculture, states should immediately investigate potential recipient deaths,
notify the recipient of the match and allow 10 days to respond before adverse action is taken,
such as termination of benefits.
9 Test items were selected based on the amount won in the lottery and whether the alert had been
dispositioned.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Similar conditions regarding FIA not ensuring the LDSSs conducted appropriate
follow-up on PARIS alerts were commented upon in our two preceding audit
reports dating back to March 2019. Deficiencies with LDSSs follow-up on
computer match results were also noted by the DHS Office of Inspector General
(OIG) audits of the LDSSs. In response to our preceding audit report, DHS, on
behalf of FIA, indicated that by January 2023 FIA would complete monthly
reviews to ensure computer alerts were properly dispositioned. However, as of
July 2025 FIA had not implemented this process. Delays in investigating and
taking appropriate corrective action for the match results including pursuing
collection of overpayments could reduce the likelihood that overpayments will be
recovered.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs alert activity to ensure the LDSSs
a. conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of alerts (repeat), and
b. collect any overpayments identified in accordance with its policy,
including those noted above.
Finding 3
FIA did not have complete data to identify recipients who were incarcerated
and did not ensure proper action was taken when incarcerated recipients
were identified resulting in 1,858 recipients continuing to receive SNAP
and/or TCA benefits while incarcerated.
Analysis
FIA did not have complete data to identify recipients who were incarcerated and
did not ensure proper action was taken when incarcerated recipients were
identified, resulting in 1,858 recipients continuing to receive SNAP and/or TCA
benefits while incarcerated. Under federal regulations individuals who are
incarcerated for more than 30 days are ineligible to receive SNAP and TCA
benefits while incarcerated.
Although FIA performed weekly matches to identify incarcerated individuals
using Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS)
incarceration records, our review disclosed that the data used in these matches
was incomplete and FIA did not always ensure proper action was taken for
matches identified. For example, DPSCS’ records were missing social security
numbers for 11,594 (or 37 percent) of the 31,290 individuals incarcerated as of
May 2025. Our Data Analytics Unit independently obtained incarceration records
16

--- Page 19 ---
directly from DPSCS10 and matched this data against individuals receiving
benefits between July 2022 and March 2025. Our match identified 1,858
incarcerated individuals that had received SNAP and/or TCA benefits after
incarceration for at least 30 days.
Our test11 of 20 of these recipients disclosed that FIA’s match did not identify 15
recipients who, as of November 2025, had received benefits (SNAP and/or TCA)
since being incarcerated totaling $158,000. For the remaining 5 recipients,
although they were identified by FIA’s match, they continued to receive benefits
after incarceration totaling approximately $46,000. FIA could not readily explain
why these recipients were not identified and/or investigated to prevent future
payments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FIA
a. work with the DPSCS to obtain complete incarceration records;
b. work with LDSSs to ensure SNAP and TCA benefits are properly
terminated for recipients who are incarcerated; and
c. to the extent possible, recover any benefits improperly issued to
incarcerated individuals, including those noted above.
We determined that Finding 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DHS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
10 The data we obtained from DPSCS covered the period between July 2017 and March 2025 and
included the periods of incarceration based on dates of inmate intake, transfer, and release. We
determined that the incarceration records we received from DPSCS were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes of our match.
11 We selected individuals based on the length of time incarcerated according to DPSCS records.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 5
FIA did not ensure the LDSSs had a documented hardship exemption and
family independence plan for TCA recipients receiving benefits for more
than five years in accordance with federal and State regulations.
Analysis
FIA did not ensure the LDSSs had a documented hardship exemption and family
independence plan for TCA recipients receiving benefits for more than five years
in accordance with federal and State regulations. Federal and State regulations
limit TCA benefits to a five-year lifetime period, unless the LDSS grants the
recipient a hardship exemption (such as a significant barrier preventing the parent
from holding a job). State regulations require the LDSS to document the
applicable reason(s) for the exemption and establish a plan within 60 days to
achieve recipient independence. The E&E system automatically terminated
benefits for individuals receiving benefits for more than five years unless a
hardship exemption is entered in the system. According to FIA records, as of
April 2025 there were 1,508 recipients receiving benefits beyond the five-year
period, with related monthly assistance totaling approximately $1.5 million.
Our test of 34 recipients12 receiving TCA benefits beyond the five-year period as
of April 2025 disclosed that the LDSSs did not have documentation to support the
hardship exemption entered into E&E and/or the required independence plan for
15 recipients, including 4 recipients who were also noted in our prior audit.
According to FIA records, benefits received by these 15 recipients beyond the
five-year limit totaled $1.1 million. For example, as of April 2025, one recipient
had received benefits totaling approximately $98,000 after the five-year period
was reached in January 2020. Although TCA is primarily federally funded, to the
extent that these TCA benefits are determined to be improper, FIA may need to
reimburse the federal government for the related federal fund expenditures.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that FIA ensure that the LDSSs
a. document hardship exemptions and prepare related independence plans
for any recipient receiving TCA benefits for more than five years
including those noted above, as required; and
b. pursue recovery of any TCA benefits received by recipients who did not
have a qualifying hardship exemption.
12 We selected the recipients for testing based on materiality and duration of payments made to
them.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 6
FIA did not conduct required reviews of LDSSs to ensure Medicaid eligibility
determinations and redeterminations were timely, proper, and supported
potentially resulting in payments on behalf of ineligible individuals.
Analysis
FIA did not conduct required reviews of LDSSs to ensure Medicaid eligibility
determinations and redeterminations were timely, proper, and supported. DHS
has an agreement with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) delegating the
LDSSs responsibility for performing eligibility determinations and annual
redeterminations for certain Medicaid recipients, such as recipients whose
eligibility is not based on income. The agreement with MDH requires DHS to
perform statistical reviews to monitor the timeliness and accuracy of the LDSSs’
determinations. According to FIA records, the LDSSs processed approximately
91,000 Medicaid applications during fiscal year 2025.
Our review of FIA records as of October 2025 disclosed that 1,950 of the
recipients processed by the LDSSs had not received the required annual eligibility
redetermination between December 2023 and September 2025. According to
MDH records, Medicaid claims totaling approximately $7.1 million were paid for
546 of these recipients after their redetermination due date. In addition, our test
of 20 eligibility determinations13 disclosed that 3 recipients were improperly
determined to be eligible for long term care despite exceeding the $2,500 asset
limit established by Medicaid.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that FIA ensure LDSS Medicaid eligibility determinations
are timely and proper, as required by its agreement with MDH.
Finding 7
FIA did not take sufficient action to reduce the Maryland SNAP error rate,
resulting in penalties totaling $28 million being assessed on the State.
Analysis
FIA did not take sufficient action to reduce the Maryland SNAP error rate,
resulting in penalties totaling $28 million being assessed on the State. The United
States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
calculates an annual SNAP error rate, which measures a state’s ability to properly
13 Test items were selected from determinations made between January 2023 and February 2025
based on the determination date and Medicaid coverage group.
19

--- Page 22 ---
determine eligibility and issue benefits in the correct amount. According to
federal regulations, states that exceed the national average error rates for two
consecutive years are assessed a penalty.
We received a referral on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline that DHS
management may have intentionally manipulated the error rate to enable the State
to defer the increased contribution for SNAP costs imposed by the One Big
Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA) of 2025. In this regard, OBBBA will require states
to pay a portion of the federal cost of SNAP benefits based on their error rate.
This requirement takes effect in October 2027, but OBBBA provides that states
with error rates above a certain level14 in federal fiscal year 2025 or 2026 will not
have to pay this cost until federal fiscal year 2029 or 2030, respectively. FIA
estimated that the State’s contribution could total $240 million per year.
We were unable to substantiate the
allegation, but did note that FIA did
not take sufficient action to ensure the Figure 5
error rate was consistent with national SNAP Error Rates
Federal Fiscal Years 2010 to 2024
averages. Specifically, FNS
determined that Maryland’s error rate 40% 35.6%
in fiscal years 2022, 2023, and 2024
was 35.6 percent, 19 percent, and 13.6 30%
percent, respectively (see Figure 5).
20% 8.4% 13.6%
The national average for this period
19.0%
ranged between 10.9 percent to 11.7
10%
percent. As a result, FNS assessed
FIA a $16.6 million penalty for fiscal
0%
years 2022 and 2023 and an $11.4
million penalty for fiscal year 2024.
Maryland Error Rate National Error Rate Average
Source: USDA FNS
Maryland’s error rate had historically
been close to the national average.15
FIA advised that the significant
increase between fiscal years 2019 and 2022 primarily resulted from changes
made by the federal government during the COVID-19 public health emergency.
While the fiscal year 2023 and 2024 error rates decreased, it was still above the
national average in both years. As previously noted in this report, FIA did not
have a comprehensive quality assurance process or adequate procedures in place
14 States with an error rate that exceed 20 percent when multiplied by a factor of 1.5 in 2025 or
2026 will be allowed to delay implementation of the OBBBA requirement.
15 Error rate data was not available from the USDA for federal fiscal years 2015, 2016, 2020, and
2021, and as of the time of our review the federal fiscal year 2025 error rate was not available.
20

--- Page 23 ---
during the audit period to ensure that SNAP eligibility determinations were
properly calculated and documented, which contributed to the high error rates.
In April 2025, FIA reinstituted a requirement for the LDSSs to perform
supervisory reviews of SNAP eligibility determinations on a test basis. FIA
further advised that it had taken other action to reduce the error rate, such as
revising employee trainings and using data analytics to identify high risk cases.
Due to the timing of these efforts, they were not subject to our audit but we did
note some additional actions FIA could implement to address the errors. For
example, FIA did not have a process to identify the LDSSs and employees with
high individual error rates to ensure the issues were addressed. FIA should
monitor the results of its efforts to determine if they are sufficient to reduce the
error rate consistent with the national average, or whether additional efforts are
required.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that FIA take sufficient action to lower its SNAP error rate
and avoid federal penalties, such as implementing a comprehensive quality
assurance process.
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 8
DHS improperly awarded the Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) Services
contract, which delayed the implementation of secure chip technology that
could have reduced or mitigated stolen EBT claims paid by the State.
Analysis
DHS improperly awarded the EBT Services contract resulting in the delayed
implementation of secure chip technology, that could have significantly reduced
or mitigated the amount of stolen EBT claims paid by the State. DHS contracts
with a vendor to administer the State’s EBT system for SNAP, TCA, and TDAP.
Recipients of these programs receive a Maryland EBT card, which is a debit-type
card that can be used at approved retailers to access their benefits. In July 2024,
DHS awarded a contract valued at approximately $20 million to the incumbent
vendor that has been providing these services16 since 2008.
Our review disclosed that DHS awarded the contract to the incumbent vendor
despite the vendor omitting certain pricing information required by the request for
16 DHS had multiple contracts with the vendor over this period. The most recent contract was
awarded in December 2014.
21

--- Page 24 ---
proposal. The omission of these costs resulted in the incumbent’s financial
proposal being $11.1 million lower than the other bidder, which should have been
investigated by DHS before selecting the vendor. The price discrepancy was
addressed when the contract was presented to BPW but DHS responded that “we
would not bring to you, the constitutional officers of Maryland, an unlawful
contract to sign.”
In April 2024, the losing bidder filed an appeal with the Maryland State Board of
Contract Appeals (MSBCA) on the basis that DHS’ evaluation of the financial
proposals materially violated State procurement laws. MSBCA ruled in favor of
the losing bidder in August 2024.17 As a result, DHS awarded a new $38.4
million contract to this vendor covering the period from November 2025 to June
2035 (with renewal options). The incumbent vendor continued to provide EBT
services under its prior contract while DHS transitioned to the new vendor.
According to DHS records, during this period which ran from July 2024 to
December 2025, payments to the incumbent vendor totaled $10.9 million.
The improper procurement delayed the planned implementation of EBT cards
with secure chip technology which can significantly reduce instances of EBT
fraud. According to FIA records, the cost to replace stolen EBT benefits between
February 2025 and January 2026 totaled $12.6 million which is covered by State
funds. A 2026 press release from the California Governor’s Office noted that it
experienced an 83 percent reduction in EBT theft after adopting secure chip
technology.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that contracts are only awarded to vendors who submit proposals
that comply with the terms of the RFP and are susceptible for award, and
b. work to implement EBT cards with secure chip card technology as soon
as possible.
17 The Baltimore City Circuit Court affirmed MSBCA’s decision in March 2025.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 9
FIA did not adequately monitor certain contracts and agreements related to
its public assistance programs to ensure that services were provided and
related payments were supported.
Analysis
FIA did not adequately monitor certain contracts and agreements related to its
public assistance programs that were procured by DHS (on behalf of FIA) and the
LDSSs. FIA could not document that deliverables were received on contracts and
agreements procured by DHS, and did not ensure amounts invoiced were proper.
According to FIA records, during our audit period, there were 523 contracts and
agreements procured by DHS on behalf of FIA valued at $651.6 million. We
tested 15 invoices totaling $49.3 million from 5 of these centralized contracts and
agreements totaling $144.4 million.18
Our test disclosed that FIA did not obtain documentation to support that
deliverables, such as required reports, were received for 4 contracts totaling
$123.6 million. In addition, for 3 of the contracts, required support for 8 invoices
totaling $9.9 million was not obtained. For example, for 3 invoices totaling $2.4
million, FIA did not obtain documentation to support that services were provided
and the propriety of payroll charges totaling $2.2 million. FIA’s Contract
Monitoring and Invoice Protocol requires supporting documentation to be
submitted and reviewed prior to payment of invoices.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of documentation to support billed costs on
certain contracts have been commented upon in our five preceding audit reports
dating back to November 2007. DHS’ response to our prior report, on behalf of
FIA, disagreed with our recommendation regarding documentation to support
billings and asserted that each contract is monitored differently based on its size
and scope of service. As noted above, our current audit noted FIA’s monitoring
of contracts procured by DHS continues to be insufficient.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records, timesheets,
and receipts, to verify the accuracy of billings, as required by its policy
(repeat); and
b. obtain the aforementioned missing deliverables or pursue recovery of
payments if the deliverables are not provided.
18 Test items were selected based on materiality during the period of April 2022 to May 2025.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Family Investment Administration (FIA) for the period
beginning June 1, 2021 and ending February 28, 2025. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine FIA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the quality assurance processes used by FIA to
monitor the local departments of social services’ administration of the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary Cash
Assistance, Temporary Disability Assistance Program, and Medical Assistance;
FIA’s administration of the home energy assistance programs; information
systems security and control; contracts; and grants. In addition, we reviewed
certain activities related to a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include various support services provided by DHS’ Office of the
Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, certain purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of the DHS Office of the Secretary and related units.
Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance
with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of FIA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State
of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including FIA. We did review certain
aspects of the federal SNAP program because of the potential impact on the
annual error rate, which could result in sanctions.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
24

--- Page 27 ---
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 1, 2021 to February 28, 2025, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of FIA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from the Eligibility and Enrollment System and automated
records relating to energy assistance programs for purposes of testing selected
attributes relating to recipient eligibility, program payments, and FIA’s
monitoring efforts. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
FIA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
25

--- Page 28 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to FIA, were considered
by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect FIA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to FIA and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
26

--- Page 29 ---
The response from DHS, on behalf of FIA, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit
report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance
with State law. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
27

--- Page 30 ---
APPENDIX
Wes Moore, Governor • Aruna Miller, Lt. Governor • Stacy L. Rodgers, Acting Secretary
July 9, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE, Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards,
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Re: Audit Report on the Family Investment Administration (June 1, 2021 to February 28, 2025)
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Please accept this letter in response to the Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) June 23, 2026,
communication. Attached is our response to the draft report for the Legislative Audit Report of the
Department of Human Services — Family Investment Administration for the period beginning June 1,
2021, and ending Feb. 28, 2025.
The Department is focused on making vital benefits easier to access and more secure. We are building a
public assistance system that is faster for families, more resilient against fraud, and more accountable to
taxpayers. Addressing audit findings is a top priority. We are committed to ensuring findings are fully
resolved and are used to strengthen the integrity and performance of the programs we administer.
Despite the complexities of administering more than $1.8 billion in public benefit programs to assist
nearly 1 million Marylanders annually, the Department has aggressively pursued data-driven
modernization efforts that protect taxpayer dollars and successfully resolved three repeat findings from
our previous audit. We have also moved with urgency to implement real-time corrective actions for new
findings in our current audit.
We welcome the OLA report as instructive and helpful feedback. However, the Department has
significant concerns regarding the assertion that our 2024 Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) contract
procurement is evidence of a systemic failure of our procurement review process. Labeling a single
procurement interpretation error as a failure to follow RFP terms significantly oversimplifies the
procurement process.
During the period of this audit, the Department has been laser-focused on making benefits easier for
Marylanders to lawfully access their eligible benefits by:
• Increasing capacity to efficiently and effectively handle benefits cases by hiring nearly 200 new
caseworkers and supervisors, reducing the program staff vacancy rate by almost three-quarters.
• Streamlining, modernizing, and improving oversight of benefit applications through
MarylandBenefits.gov and the Maryland One Application.
• Automating verification checks on income and disability information within the Maryland
Eligibility and Enrollment (E&E) system to simplify case management, strengthen program
integrity, and improve customer service.
25 S. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21201 -3330
Tel: 1-800 -332-6347 | TTY: 1 -800 -735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 31 ---
• Implementing real-time security protocols to block known fraudulent phone numbers from
accessing the EBT system to check balances or hijack PINs.
• Applying system-wide controls that stop EBT users from picking simple, easily guessable PINs.
• Empowering customers to instantly freeze and unfreeze their cards and opt-in to real-time alerts
for transactions or account changes to help prevent fraud.
As a result of our efforts, we have achieved the following outcomes:
• From federal fiscal year 2022 through 2025, Maryland has reduced its Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) payment error rate by more than 63%, the largest relative reduction
of any state during that time.
• Missing case documentation across Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) and SNAP case files is
down by as much as 60% as a result of targeted operational overhauls and case review processes.
• Maryland ranked third in the nation for application processing timeliness in a federal report
covering public assistance applications processed from July to December 2025, demonstrating a
swift and responsive system for families in need.
• The Department partnered with the U.S. Secret Service to prevent the theft of an estimated $22.9
million in SNAP benefits during 2025 by inspecting 3,000 point-of-sale devices for skimming
machines at 493 Maryland businesses.
The Department remains committed to strengthening the integrity and performance of these vital benefit
programs. Later this year, Maryland will be the fourth state in the nation to implement EMV (Europay,
Mastercard, Visa) chip and tap card technology to better protect customers from fraud and benefit theft.
We thank OLA for their collaborative partnership. We are happy to answer any questions you may
have. Please contact Marva Sutherland, Inspector General, at Marva.Sutherland@maryland.gov.
Yours in service,
Stacy L. Rodgers, MPA
Acting Secretary
c: Gloria Brown Burnett, Deputy Secretary for Operations
Daniel Wait, Deputy Secretary for Talent & Customer Service
Webster Ye, Chief of Staff
Heather Zenone, Assistant Secretary for Policy & Data
Larry Handerhan, Assistant Secretary for Programs
Augustin Ntabaganyimana, Executive Director, Family Investment Administration
Marva Sutherland, Inspector General
Shelly-Ann Dyer, Assistant Inspector General for Audits
2

--- Page 32 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
OLA NOTE: Numerous responses include lengthy information about DHS
efforts after our audit fieldwork was completed. This information was not subject
to audit and we cannot opine as to the accuracy of these statements. Rather, these
efforts will be subject to review during the subsequent audit.
Public Assistance Programs
Finding 1
FIA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure that the LDSSs properly
determined eligibility for public assistance programs it administered.
We recommend that FIA
a. establish comprehensive procedures, including supervisory reviews, to ensure
the LDSSs properly determined eligibility for public assistance programs and
the related benefits;
b. ensure that the LDSSs properly record and scan all documentation as required
to support the propriety of eligibility determinations (repeat);
c. verify unemployment compensation as required by federal regulations, maintain
documentation of the related results, and identify and record unemployment
income for TCA recipients, including those noted above (repeat); and
d. obtain the missing documents noted in our finding and take corrective action for
any unsupported eligibility determinations, improper payments, or other
program requirements (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department is committed to administering public benefit programs
additional comments as effectively and ensuring eligible Marylanders receive the assistance for which
deemed necessary. they qualify. During Fiscal Year 2025, the Local Departments of Social
Services (LDSSs) processed approximately 964,000 applications across the
Department's major public assistance programs.
The Department is constantly working to ensure that eligibility is properly
determined for the public assistance programs it administers. Since the previous
OLA fiscal and compliance audit, the Department has strengthened oversight
through staff training, updated policy guidance, enhanced quality assurance
reviews, and system improvements. As shown in the chart below, these efforts
have significantly reduced missing documentation since 2022.
Page 1 of 24

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Since 2022, the Department has implemented the following corrective actions:
● Conducted documentation requirements training in July 2024 and
refresher training in November 2024.
● Issued and updated our policy guidance to the Department’s family
investment staff through the following Action Transmittals (AT) that
clarified how policy is implemented: AT 12-27 (Document Imaging),
AT 13-35 (ECMS Record Retention), and AT 24-7 (Proper Handling
of Case Records).
● Enhanced the Eligibility & Enrollment (E&E) system in June 2024 to
strengthen the Supervisory Case Pre-Review (SCPR) process,
including verification that required documentation has been uploaded
to the Electronic Content Management (ECM) system.
● Developed and distributed updated training materials, including an
Interview Script that serves as a documentation checklist for eligibility
staff.
● Implemented automated system verifications in E&E, effective March
30, 2026, at application, when adding an individual to a case, and at
redetermination. Required verifications now include SOLQi, SVES,
BEACON (Department of Labor), The Work Number (TWN), and the
Electronic Disqualified Recipient System (eDRS) for SNAP cases.
These actions have also helped ensure benefit determinations are timely.
Maryland ranked third in the nation in Application Processing Timeliness in a
report covering applications processed in July to December 2025.
The Department acknowledges that additional improvements can be made to
further strengthen consistency and compliance across all LDSSs. The
Department agrees to continue formalizing and enhancing its standard
operating procedures, strengthening supervisory review protocols,
Page 2 of 24

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
implementing additional system enhancements, and expanding proactive
monitoring to help prevent documentation errors before benefits are issued.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Mar 31, 2027
Please provide details of To further enhance eligibility procedures, including strengthening consistency
corrective action or and compliance across all LDSSs, the Department has implemented or is
explain disagreement. implementing the following initiatives:
Actions taken:
● No Change Maryland Benefit Review Automation: Implemented in
January 2026 to automate periodic reviews and reduce administrative
workload for eligibility staff.
● Automated System Verifications: To ensure personal information
added to case files is proper, E&E now automatically runs five required
verification sources during application, redetermination, and when
adding an individual to a case, including SOLQi, SVES, The Work
Number, BEACON, and eDRS (SNAP only). The system retrieves
verification data, populates applicable information into the case record,
and generates alerts for case manager review before eligibility is
finalized.
● Targeted Staff Training: Expanded micro-learning opportunities,
including a new Customer-Focused Interview Training developed in
partnership with the University of Maryland School of Social Work.
● Enhanced Supervisory Case Reviews: Strengthened supervisory
training to improve error identification, coaching, and staff
development. This includes data-driven models to identify error-prone
cases and focus more on income-related errors when auto assigning
cases for review. Developing key performance metrics from this
process that correlate with Quality Control outcomes.
Actions to be taken:
● Statewide Process Management (SPM): Standardizing case
processing requirements across all local departments, with
implementation occurring over the next 3 to 9 months.
● Continuous Quality Improvement: Using root cause analysis and
partnering with organizations such as US Digital Response and
Georgetown University to identify process improvements and
strengthen pre-eligibility reviews.
● Predictive Risk Scoring: Developing a Frontend Intelligence System
to identify cases with a higher likelihood of eligibility errors for
additional review.
● Artificial Intelligence Tools: Piloting AI-powered assistants that
provide eligibility workers with real-time policy guidance, beginning
Page 3 of 24

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
with SNAP and expanding to additional programs as appropriate.
In addition, the Department and the Maryland Benefits team are assessing the
feasibility of incorporating mandatory documentation checkpoints into the
eligibility determination workflow to further strengthen compliance and reduce
documentation deficiencies.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2027
Please provide details of As discussed above, the Department has significantly reduced missing
corrective action or documentation over the past four years but additional improvements are
explain disagreement. needed. The Department previously issued the following guidelines to improve
document collection and retention.
Actions taken:
1. Action Transmittal (AT) #25-161 (Supervisory Case Pre-Review
Requirements), effective May 1, 2025: Establishes mandatory
supervisory pre-approval review across all local departments. This
review is designed to identify missing documentation, benefit
calculation errors, and eligibility issues prior to case finalization.
2. AT #26-03 (Mandatory Clearance/Verification Systems
Requirements), effective September 30, 2025: Establishes uniform
documentation standards for verification systems across programs and
requires all data match results to be uploaded into the E&E system.
Actions to be taken:
1. Establish an internal Department workgroup of frontline staff,
supervisors, and policy analysts to identify the root causes of missing
documentation and develop actionable recommendations for statewide
implementation by September 30, 2026. Implement the workgroup’s
recommendations by June 30, 2027. If additional system improvements
are needed in E&E, the department may require additional time and
resources, and will need to be added to the existing technical roadmap.
2. Incorporate review of document management practices into Quality
Assurance procedures to strengthen ongoing monitoring and
compliance by June 30, 2027. This will include steps to assess whether
implementation of recommendations was effective to address identified
root causes.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept. 30, 2027
1 We have edited DHS’ responses to remove links to online documents, as allowed by our policy.
Page 4 of 24

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The Department is committed to verifying and documenting Unemployment
corrective action or Insurance (UI) information for TCA recipients. FIA conducted a review of all
explain disagreement. 15 cases in OLA’s sample and found that 13 of the 15 cases reflect appropriate
BEACON verification with no active UI affecting the eligibility decision. FIA
acknowledges a process gap in 2 of the 15 cases where BEACON was not run
or documented and therefore the benefit was not reduced accordingly.
Since the audit period, FIA has released Action Transmittal 22-34, TCA
BEACON UI Clearances, which enforces that BEACON is to be accessed to
verify UI receipt at application and during the first three months following
approval, a requirement reaffirmed in AT 26-03, Mandatory Clearance
Verification Systems Requirements, issued September 30, 2025. FIA
implemented automated clearance and verification in the E&E system effective
March 27, 2026. As part of this broader automation effort, BEACON UI
clearance now runs automatically at application, redetermination, and interim
change when a new member of the assistance unit is added to the case. AT 26-
03 notified local departments of this change.
Actions to be taken:
● Ensure the required UI clearances are included in the standard
supervisory case review and quality control processes on all cases
moving forward.
● Work with the Maryland Benefits team to identify system
enhancements that will run the required UI checks in accordance with
AT 22-34.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept. 30, 2026
Please provide details of The Department has begun a case-by-case review of all cases in the audit
corrective action or sample. The administration will upload missing documents, where necessary,
explain disagreement. to resolve this recommendation and take necessary corrective actions.
Page 5 of 24

--- Page 37 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and appropriate follow-up on
instances of questionable recipient eligibility identified by its computer matches.
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs' alert activity to ensure the LDSSs
a. conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of alerts (repeat), and
b. collect any overpayments identified in accordance with its policy, including
those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department is committed to ensuring that the LDSSs conduct appropriate
additional comments as follow-up on computer matches (i.e. PARIS, Death, Lottery) made between the
deemed necessary. E&E system and outside data sources. A comparison between the population
sample in OLA’s 2022 audit with the population sampled in OLA’s 2026 audit
demonstrates that the actions taken have resulted in meaningful improvements
in the handling of PARIS alerts.
.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2027
Please provide details of To continue the Department’s progress in conducting timely and appropriate
corrective action or follow-up of alerts, the Department issued Action Transmittals AT 19-05 and
explain disagreement. AT 25-03 (Revised New Hire, Death, Prison, and PARIS Data Match
Requirements) to clarify data match policies and procedures. Action
Transmittals clarify how our team members implement policies and
procedures, and thus contribute to improving our timeliness and accuracy on
alerts. These policies were established following consultations with federal
partners and a comprehensive review of federal and state regulations.
Page 6 of 24

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
The Department is building on our recent progress to further improve
performance in this area.
For PARIS and death matches, all data matches require manual staff
intervention. To address this, the Department is partnering with MD Benefits to
automate computer match processing in alignment with AT 19-05 and AT 25-
03. Under the automated system, the receipt of a PARIS or death data match
will instantly trigger a request to the customer or family member for secondary
verification, ensuring customers have sufficient time to respond. If a customer
fails to act, FIA is working with our federal partner to explore options to have
the system automatically close the case following standard adverse action
notice timeframes. FIA will monitor this process through regular reporting
generated in E&E.
For lottery matches, the Department is automating the case closure following
the adverse action requirements. Based on the date of the winnings, the system
will automatically generate an overpayment claim.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 31, 2026
Please provide details of In accordance with established agency policy, the Department immediately
corrective action or began collecting any identified overpayments, including establishing claims for
explain disagreement. the specific cases noted in the finding, as described below:
PARIS: 9 cases
Death: 3 cases
Lottery: 10 cases; Of the seven cases cited as still open as of February 2026,
four are closed and three remain open. We are actively working with the LDSS
to ensure these cases are reviewed and overpayments are established as
applicable by August 31, 2026.
For the $2M lottery winner cited in the finding, the Department closed that
Elderly Simplified Application Project (ESAP) case in February of 2026 and is
working to collect the appropriate overpayments from the customer as required
by federal law.
As part of this audit review and as part of our continuing work to reduce our
SNAP Payment Error Rate, we are further reviewing our overpayment process
to see how we can improve our accuracy by making revisions to the
overpayment manual, and creating system enhancements to add a calculation
sheet within E&E. A calculation sheet creates an indisputable paper trail. It
links the verified income documents (paystubs, tax returns) directly to the final
benefit amount. If an applicant challenges a decision, the calculation sheet is
the primary evidence used in a fair hearing to prove the state applied the
regulations correctly. In addition, updates to the system parameters to ensure
all required documentation is included in the case file. We expect this to be
completed by December 2026.
Page 7 of 24

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
FIA did not have complete data to identify recipients who were incarcerated and did
not ensure proper action was taken when incarcerated recipients were identified,
resulting in 1,858 recipients continuing to receive SNAP and/or TCA benefits while
incarcerated.
We recommend that FIA
a. work with the DPSCS to obtain complete incarceration records;
b. work with LDSSs to ensure SNAP and TCA benefits are properly terminated
for recipients who are incarcerated; and
c. to the extent possible, recover any benefits improperly issued to incarcerated
individuals, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department is committed to ensuring that incarcerated individuals stop
additional comments as receiving SNAP and TCA benefits consistent with federal law and state policy.
deemed necessary. Section 11 of the Food and Nutrition Act requires denial of benefits for
individuals incarcerated for more than 30 days but federal requirements also
note that “no adverse actions, such as denial, termination, or reduction of a
household's benefits, may be taken as a result of a match until after the
information has been independently verified and the matched individual has
been provided notice of the match and an opportunity to contest the findings.”
(emphasis added.) This requirement ensures state agencies do not violate
privacy protections given to individuals under federal law.
The Department’s policy is located in this Action Transmittal, AT 25-03
Revised New Hire, Death, Prison, and PARIS Data Match Requirements,
which indicates the actions needed to independently verify. The federally
required secondary verification, including collateral contact with the recipient,
prior to benefit termination, can only happen once the Department receives a
match, which does not happen in real time. While there is no explicit timeframe
in AT 25-03, we believe 30 days after the required action on the match is
needed for verification, putting the expected timeframe for removal of benefits,
if appropriate, at 60 days after the match is addressed in accordance with AT
25-03. The Department’s analysis of the data provided by OLA shows that
88.5% were addressed within this expected timeframe.
The Department will work with DPSCS to identify any potential difference
between information auditors were provided and what the Department’s
eligibility system captures and make any required corrections, if necessary.
The Department will also ensure that the incarcerated individual’s benefit is
suspended or discontinued while preserving eligible children and other family
members.
Page 8 of 24

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2027
Please provide details of The Department will work closely with DPSCS to assess gaps in the current
corrective action or data file and pursue system and operational enhancements so the Department
explain disagreement. can obtain complete incarceration records in a timely manner. Additionally, the
Department will:
● Update the E&E system to display prison match data based on SSN
alignment even when a name mismatch exists.
● Issue updated policy guidance and provide staff training on how to
appropriately process these alerts, including documenting and
resolving alerts determined to be incorrect matches.
These continuous quality improvement measures will significantly enhance this
process and support compliance with applicable policies.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2027
Please provide details of The Department is reviewing the cases cited by OLA to determine whether
corrective action or closure is appropriate. For the 5 recipients included in the match and still
explain disagreement. receiving benefits after incarceration, FIA determined that 1 match contained
an incorrect name, and the 4 other individuals are no longer incarcerated and
have active cases. Overpayments are being processed. FIA is currently
evaluating the remaining 15 cases and will proceed with overpayment
collections where benefits were issued in error.
Based on the outcome of each case review mentioned in the sample above and
going forward when matches occur, the Department will work with LDSSs to
ensure SNAP and TCA benefits are properly terminated for recipients who are
incarcerated by pursuing system and operational enhancements so the LDSS
can access complete incarceration records in a timely manner and appropriately
process alerts, including documenting and resolving alerts determined to be
incorrect matches.
The Department will maintain benefits access to eligible children and other
family members of the incarcerated individual, as permitted by law.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2027
Please provide details of Based on the outcome of each case review mentioned in the sample above and
corrective action or going forward when matches occur (i.e. showing incarcerated individuals
explain disagreement. receiving benefits), the Department will determine whether any benefits were
issued in error. If errors are identified, as required by law, the Department will
initiate overpayment collection procedures in accordance with program
requirements.
Page 9 of 24

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 4 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the following
finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DHS’
responses, have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 10 of 24

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
FIA did not ensure the LDSSs had a documented hardship exemption and family
independence plan for TCA recipients receiving benefits for more than five years in
accordance with federal and State regulations.
We recommend that FIA ensure that the LDSSs
a. document hardship exemptions and prepare related independence plans for any
recipient receiving TCA benefits for more than five years, including those noted
above, as required; and
b. pursue recovery of any TCA benefits received by recipients who did not have a
qualifying hardship exemption.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department is committed to maintaining strict compliance with state and
additional comments as federal law while serving Maryland’s most vulnerable residents. The TCA
deemed necessary. hardship exemption is a critical lifeline to ensure vulnerable families - such as
those with medical disabilities - do not lose access to benefits.
The recipients in the audit’s sample include SSI recipients, individuals with
documented disabilities, and caregivers for disabled family members — all 15
of whom meet hardship exemption criteria under State policy based on the
Department’s review. As such, no recollection of benefits to these recipients is
warranted at this time.
This finding does identify documentation and administrative processes that
require improvement, including inconsistent completion, signature, and timely
upload of required documentation in E&E, such as hardship exemption forms,
Family Independence Plans, and local director approvals. Accordingly, the
Department agrees with the analysis around documentation compliance while
clarifying this does not indicate improper payments or fraud.
In December 2023, FIS issued AT 24-24 60 Month Hardship Exemption,
outlining system enhancements for processing hardship exemptions when TCA
recipients reach their 60-month benefit limit. The Department developed an on-
demand 60+ Month Report/Dashboard for local departments to see the cases
approaching the 60-month limit.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Apr 30, 2027
Page 11 of 24

--- Page 43 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The Department agrees that hardship exemption documentation—including a
corrective action or completed exemption form and independence plan—must be present in E&E
explain disagreement. for every TCA recipient receiving benefits beyond month 60.
To strengthen documentation compliance and oversight, the Department will:
● Establish a central office monitoring report identifying all active TCA
cases beyond month 60, including indicators showing whether a
completed exemption form and independence plan are present in E&E.
The Department will assess enhancements to improve real-time
visibility and ensure consistent application across all 24 jurisdictions.
● Implement mandatory supervisory review at month 58 for all TCA
cases, with documentation in E&E prior to issuance of month-60 and
subsequent benefits. The month-58 alert will require documented
supervisory sign-off and verification that all hardship exemption
documentation is complete before benefit continuation.
See below for the follow up related to the 15 cases noted in the finding.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec. 31, 2027
Page 12 of 24

--- Page 44 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of
corrective action or For all of the 15 cases cited in this finding analysis, the Department reviewed
explain disagreement. and confirmed recipients qualified for a hardship exemption. For these cases,
no recovery of TCA benefits is warranted.
In these cases, the evidence of hardship was not consistently documented in the
case file - for example, medical documentation was in the case file to identify a
disability that meets the criteria for hardship, but the hardship form was not
completed by the local department.
As of September 2025, the Department has ensured the recipient's qualifying
basis for a hardship exemption is documented in the case record. This includes
the 4 cases noted in the prior audit, including the case identified as having
received approximately $98,000, where the Department obtained both a
hardship exemption form and a family independence plan present in the case
record within the period under review.
For TCA recipients more broadly, the Department's review determined that the
underlying issue in these cases was the identification and labeling of documents
within the electronic case record rather than the absence of required
documentation or improper eligibility. Accordingly, the Department is
establishing document naming and indexing standards in E&E so that required
documents, including hardship exemption forms and family independence
plans, can be readily located.
The Department will complete the outstanding documentation by September
30, 2026 and apply the updated document naming and indexing standards in
E&E by December 2027.
The Department will pursue overpayments for any TCA cases identified during
case reviews that were not eligible for a qualifying hardship exemption at the
time of benefit issuance.
Page 13 of 24

--- Page 45 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
FIA did not conduct required reviews of LDSSs to ensure Medicaid eligibility
determinations and redeterminations were timely, proper, and supported,
potentially resulting in payments on behalf of ineligible individuals.
We recommend that FIA ensure LDSS Medicaid eligibility determinations are
timely and proper, as required by its agreement with MDH.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department is committed to ensuring that Medicaid eligibility
additional comments as determinations and redeterminations are timely, proper, and supported.
deemed necessary.
The cases for the 3 long-term recipients who had assets over $2,500 have all
been closed as of May, 2025. The Department is working to immediately
review the other cases referenced.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2027
Please provide details of During the audit period, and as of May 1, 2025, the Department implemented
corrective action or the Supervisory Case Pre-Review (SCPR) protocol across all jurisdictions. This
explain disagreement. mandate, established in AT 25-16 - Supervisory Case Pre-Review
Requirements, replaces previous local review methods and requires a Lead
Worker or Family Investment Supervisor to audit Eligibility Worker cases
before final approval. The SCPR protocol addresses the requirement for regular
reviews of LDSS casework.
The Department will continue to review processes to ensure they are resulting
improvements at the LDSS in more proper eligibility determinations conducted
timely. As needed, additional corrective actions will be taken to ensure full
remediation of this issue.
To further ensure that Medicaid eligibility determinations are timely, proper,
and supported, the Department is working to standardize our post-eligibility
review process and identify training needs and policy clarifications necessary
to prevent long-term eligibility errors.
In addition, the Department is working with the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) to explore options for establishing a post-certification review
process. This consultation will support policy alignment, clarify roles and
responsibilities, and avoid duplication of efforts. The Department will
document the outcome of discussions with MDH.
Page 14 of 24

--- Page 46 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
FIA did not take sufficient action to reduce the Maryland SNAP error rate,
resulting in penalties totaling $28 million being assessed on the State.
We recommend that FIA take sufficient action to lower its SNAP error rate and
avoid federal penalties, such as implementing a comprehensive quality assurance
process.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department remains deeply committed to effectively and equitably
additional comments as distributing federal assistance benefits to all eligible Marylanders and has been
deemed necessary. proactively implementing measures to drive down our SNAP Payment Error
Rate (PER) for the past three years. The Department will continue to bring the
error rate down by doing the work correctly and ensuring the people who are
eligible for SNAP receive the benefits they’re eligible for expediently and
accurately. That’s what we are laser focused on.
Since FFY23, the Department has cut the SNAP PER by more than 60%, from
35.56% (the second-highest in the nation) to 13.08%, representing the largest
relative reduction of any state and far outpacing national improvement.
However, the Department recognizes that we did not reach the national
average, which was 10.62% for FFY25, coming within 2.46 percentage points.
We will continue to build on existing efforts to further reduce the payment
error rate below the national average while ensuring that eligible households
receive benefits accurately and timely. Every operational overhaul and
workforce investment stands as measurable proof of our full commitment to
ensure payment accuracy and timeliness.
Page 15 of 24

--- Page 47 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept. 30, 2028
Please provide details of The Department took aggressive action to continue lowering the error rate
corrective action or coming within 2.46 percentage points of the national average. We continue to
explain disagreement. actively work with other states to learn from their success for continued
progress in driving down payment error rates.
To build on past progress and reduce PER to below the national average, the
Department is implementing a comprehensive strategy to strengthen SNAP
eligibility accuracy. The strategy is centered on three core pillars: People,
Policy & Process, and Data. These priorities guide the administration’s
ongoing efforts to modernize operations, improve case accuracy, reduce
administrative burden, and strengthen program integrity.
● People: Invest in and strengthen our people through training,
additional central support, and continued workforce stabilization
a. Since January 2023, the Department has hired nearly 200 new
Family Investment caseworkers and supervisors statewide,
reducing the program staff vacancy rate by almost three-
quarters — from a peak of 19.4% in April 2022 to 4.28% in
January 2026.
b. Hosted regional Payment Accuracy Summits to promote
collaboration, share best practices, and improve payment
accuracy statewide.
Further actions to be taken or in progress:
c. Further enhance training for eligibility staff through updated
curriculum, coaching, and targeted technical assistance.
d. Expand AI-powered training and microlearning tools to
provide just-in-time learning and reinforce policy knowledge.
e. Implement customer-focused interview training to improve
information gathering, customer service, and timely eligibility
determinations.
● Policy and Process: Simplify complex policies and processes
a. Automated Maryland Benefits Reviews (semi-annual
renewals) to reduce staff workload and allow staff to focus on
more complex eligibility determinations.
b. Redesigned redetermination forms and simplify associated
notices to reduce procedural churn, improve the customer
experience, and decrease the risk of data entry errors.
Further actions to be taken or in progress:
Page 16 of 24

--- Page 48 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
c. Implement the redesigned redetermination forms and
associated notices.
d. Streamline the document submission process to strengthen
eligibility documentation, improve verification management,
and reduce administrative burden.
e. Establish and implement a dedicated team to conduct targeted
reviews of high-risk cases, identify the underlying root causes
of payment errors, and inform policy, training, and process
improvements.
● Technology/Data:
a. Implemented in E&E Automated Maryland Benefits Reviews
(semi-annual renewals) as referenced above.
Further actions to be taken or in progress:
b. Implement the redesigned redetermination form in the One
App and simplify the associated notices to reduce procedural
churn, improve the customer experience, and decrease the risk
of data entry errors.
c. Build out data tools to proactively prevent payment errors.
d. Use AI to analyze administrative records to identify high-risk
cases and develop targeted strategies to improve payment
accuracy.
e. Use AI to analyze data to identify the root causes of errors and
implement data-driven policy, training, and operational
improvements to reduce future errors.
We remain focused on continuing to reduce our Payment Error Rate despite the
passage of H.R. 1 (2025), which creates new red tape and will make it harder
for the Department to determine eligibility timely and accurately.
Page 17 of 24

--- Page 49 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 8
DHS improperly awarded the Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) Services contract,
which delayed the implementation of secure chip technology that could have
reduced or mitigated stolen EBT claims paid by the State.
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that contracts are only awarded to vendors who submit proposals that
comply with the terms of the RFP and are susceptible for award, and
b. work to implement EBT cards with secure chip card technology as soon as
possible.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide This year, Maryland will become the fourth state in the nation to implement EMV
additional comments chip technology for EBT cards, reinforcing its leadership in protecting benefits
as deemed necessary. from theft and fraud. An EMV chip card is a credit or debit card embedded with a
microprocessor chip that drastically reduces fraud, originally developed by
Europay, Mastercard, and Visa (hence EMV) This effort reflects a multi-year
modernization initiative that included several interim fraud prevention measures
while national EMV standards and technology matured.
The Department is committed to following proper procurement procedures, laws,
and regulations. However, the observations made in this finding do not represent
the full context of Maryland’s procurement framework, nor does it indicate a
systemic deficiency within the Department’s operations. Before any
recommendations of award are brought for approval at the Board of Public Works,
including this contract, the Department obtains concurrence from the Office of the
Attorney General that the recommended proposal was susceptible for award.
Maryland’s procurement system provides losing offerors the opportunity to appeal
protest denials. The Department respects the decision made by the Maryland State
Board of Contract Appeals and upheld by the Baltimore City Circuit Court, and
moved quickly to award this contract to bidder susceptible to award.
This finding focuses on a single procurement-related legal interpretation and
concludes that Maryland could have implemented EMV by February 2025,
avoiding fraud reimbursements issued thereafter. That conclusion overlooks the
technical, operational, and industry realities of deploying EMV in the EBT
environment. Only two providers in the nation that operate EBT systems were
positioned to provide the chip technology at the time of the Department's RFP was
released in September 2023. Notably, the Department had an opportunity to appeal
the circuit court’s ruling, but elected not to appeal in part to prevent additional
delays in its implementation timeline.
Page 18 of 24

--- Page 50 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Maryland’s implementation timeframe remains in the forefront of states moving to
EBT EMV cards. Statewide EMV implementation requires extensive processes
beyond just contract execution, including system development, testing, and retailer
certification. Even accounting for delays caused by the protest appeal and legal
review, Maryland’s two-and-a-half year timeframe still paces other states.
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) did not publish national EMV
standards for EBT until August 2024, after which vendors had to develop, test,
certify, and integrate compliant solutions. Even early-adopter states required years
to implement EMV. California launched approximately two years after receiving
legislative authorization, while Oklahoma and Alabama did not deploy EMV until
Spring 2026 despite beginning modernization efforts years earlier.
Maryland’s EBT EMV implementation unfolded in two major phases:
Phase 1 – Core EBT Modernization
The Department successfully transitioned Maryland's entire EBT processing
system to Fidelity Information Services (FIS), completing the statewide conversion
and launching the ebtEDGE platform in May 2026. This complex effort included
system integration, card conversion, retailer coordination, customer
communications, and statewide operational readiness.
Phase 2 – EMV Chip Card Implementation
Building on the successful FIS conversion, the Department launched the transition
of Maryland's dual-interface EMV chip-and-tap EBT cards in June 2026, less than
two months after completing the vendor transition. We are on track for a mass
deployment of chip-and-tap EBT cards later in Summer 2026 to over 400,000 EBT
households.
Maryland's implementation timeline is consistent with other states that have made
this chip card transition. Unlike most jurisdictions, Maryland simultaneously
executed both a full EBT vendor conversion on May 17, 2026, 30 days ahead of
schedule (June 30, 2026). We are on track for a statewide EMV deployment within
a highly compressed timeframe of summer 2026. The Department believes this
work represents one of the nation's most ambitious EBT modernization efforts.
Throughout the transition, the Department did not wait for EMV implementation to
strengthen program security. The Department deployed multiple interim fraud
prevention and detection measures to reduce benefit theft and protect customers,
including working directly with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Office of
Inspector General (OIG) and the U.S. Secret Service (USSS). These efforts
improved payment accuracy, strengthened oversight, enhanced system
performance, and safeguarded taxpayer resources. For example, the DHS OIG and
Page 19 of 24

--- Page 51 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
USSS partnership inspected 3,000 point-of-sale devices for skimming machines,
preventing an estimated $22.9 million in stolen EBT benefits.
Additional fraud prevention measures implemented by the Department are
summarized in the chart below.
Feature and Purpose Implementation
Date
IVR Fraud Analysis: The IVR Adaptive Fraud Solution March 24, 2023
blocks phone numbers known to have been used by
fraudsters from reaching the EBT system. The feature
makes it harder for fraudsters to check EBT account
balances, change PINs, and engage in other malicious
activities.
The (Soft) Easy personal identification number (PIN): September 29, 2022
This feature requires customers to choose PINs that are
harder for fraudsters to guess.
Card Lock and Unlock: This feature allows EBT November 8, 2023
cardholders to lock their cards on the ConnectEBT App
and by calling a phone number. We have been working
with the Maryland Retailers Association to ensure that
the flyer linked above is displayed in grocery stores
across Maryland.
Activity Alerts: Customers receive transaction and November 8, 2023
account activity alerts with this feature. Mobile App
and web users can opt-in to receive:
a. New Transaction alert - with these
functionalities, a customer will receive an
alert for every transaction, including
purchases, returns, deposits, and more.
b. Account change alert - with these
functionalities, a customer will receive an
alert for account changes such as address,
PIN, password, and others.
Customers receive alerts via the ConnectEBT App, text
messages, and email.
Page 20 of 24

--- Page 52 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 8a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details We respectfully disagree with the Office of Legislative Audits’ recommendation’s
of corrective action assertion that the procurement was handled with a disregard for RFP requirements
or explain and is evidence of a systemic failure of our procurement review process. The
disagreement. Department operates under the strict oversight of Maryland procurement law
through its control agency, the Department of General Services’ Office of State
Procurement, and the Board of Public Works, along with consultation with the
Office of Attorney General for the review of all proposed awards for legal
sufficiency, which mandates awarding procurements to 'susceptible' vendors.
Labeling a single procurement interpretation error as a failure to follow RFP terms
oversimplifies the procurement process. We will continue to ensure that contracts
are only awarded to vendors who submit proposals that comply with the terms of
the RFP and are susceptible for award.
The Department is committed to following state procurement law and processes
and takes that responsibility seriously. At the October 22, 2025 meeting of the
Board of Public Works, the Department acknowledged our mistake in the 2024
procurement process concerning the evaluation of the financial proposals of the
two bidders. The federal government’s COVID-19 pandemic benefits ended in
December 2023. One of the two bidders put in $0.00 for the pricing of COVID-19
pandemic benefits issuance and acknowledged that should a new pandemic begin
during this contract period, an amended budget would be submitted. At the time,
the Department accepted the vendor’s response and explanation for pricing. Upon
further review, the RFP should have been amended after issuance for clarity.
Ultimately, the Board of Contract Appeals and the Circuit Court disagreed with our
action, disqualified the bidder and voided the contract award. While we believe it
unlikely, the Department has enhanced its review of financial proposals to ensure
this situation does not occur in the future.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept. 30, 2026
Please provide details The Department concurs with OLA's urgency in implementing EMV chip card
of corrective action technology. The Department is proceeding expeditiously with implementation as
or explain outlined by the federally approved chip transition plan. Outlined below are key
disagreement. milestones:
● On May 17, 2026, the Department successfully executed a full EBT vendor
conversion transferring 400,000 accounts from the current vendor to the
new vendor.
● In June 2026, the Department launched a new federally required EMV
pilot that included testing 1,500 new cards in three Maryland jurisdictions
(Baltimore City, Anne Arundel and Dorchester Counties).
● As of July 6, 2026, the Department is awaiting final federal approval for
full deployment of all cards.
Maryland remains on track to become the fourth state in the nation to deploy EMV
chip cards to all customers.
Page 21 of 24

--- Page 53 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: DHS’ response states that it disagrees with OLA’s
assertion that the procurement was handled with a disregard for RFP requirements
and is evidence of a systemic failure of the procurement review process.
However, neither the finding nor the recommendation states there were systemic
problems with the procurement process. Rather, the finding focused on the fact
that DHS awarded the contract despite the vendor not complying with the
requirements of the RFP, a condition that is not disputed in its response. The
recommendation also focused on the issue identified in the analysis and
recommends that DHS should ensure that contracts are only awarded to vendors
who submit proposals that comply with the terms of the RFP and are susceptible
for award.
Nevertheless, DHS’ response indicates that it will continue to ensure that
contracts are only awarded to vendors who submit proposals that comply with the
terms of the RFP and are susceptible for award. In addition, DHS indicated that it
has enhanced its review of financial proposals to ensure this situation does not
occur in the future.
Page 22 of 24

--- Page 54 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
FIA did not adequately monitor certain contracts and agreements related to its
public assistance programs to ensure that services were provided and related
payments were supported.
We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records, timesheets, and
receipts, to verify the accuracy of billings, as required by its policy (repeat); and
b. obtain the aforementioned missing deliverables or pursue recovery of payments
if the deliverables are not provided.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Since the previous audit, the Department has taken significant steps to strengthen
additional comments as contract monitoring governance and oversight.
deemed necessary.
Most notably, the Department follows its April 2023 "Delegation of Signatory
Authority for Agreements" policy, which has been revised since, most recently on
December 23, 2025, which establishes clear approval requirements for contracts,
agreements, and memoranda of understanding. Under this policy, all contracts and
expenditures valued at $50,000 undergo enhanced review, and $100,000 or more
must be reviewed and approved by the Secretary before execution, providing an
additional layer of executive oversight for high-value procurements. All
headquarters invoices and every local office invoice over $50,000 have been
tracked and documented since November 2023.
Furthermore, contracts are reviewed and approved by the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) and the Office of Procurement to ensure compliance with
applicable procurement and legal requirements.
In May 2026, the Department implemented ePACE, an enterprise contract
lifecycle management system that strengthens contract oversight and invoice
accountability. ePACE does not replace FMIS, but clarifies the flow of the
information subsequently processed in FMIS by streamlining contract
development, routing, approval, and invoice review while serving as a centralized
repository for all contract-related documentation, including invoices and
supporting documentation. By standardizing workflows and maintaining a
complete electronic record, the system enhances transparency, improves
documentation, and strengthens internal controls throughout the contract
management process
Page 23 of 24

--- Page 55 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 31, 2027
Please provide details of The Department is committed to strengthening contract monitoring and enhancing
corrective action or invoice documentation requirements to ensure effective oversight and
explain disagreement. accountability. To improve invoice documentation, the Department will:
1. Strengthen our annual contract compliance and monitoring protocol to
promote oversight consistency and reinforce contract management
standards statewide.
2. Continue to require all designated Family Investment Administration
Contract Monitors to complete the Maryland Procurement Academy
(MDPA) Maryland Contract Monitoring Basics training program.
Documentation of training completion will be maintained on file for
compliance and oversight purposes.
3. Develop and implement a risk-informed sampling methodology that
establishes the scope and frequency of invoice reviews based on the level
of risk associated with each contract. This approach will enable the
Department to focus oversight resources on higher-risk contracts while
maintaining appropriate monitoring of all contracts.
4. Implement and enforce a policy establishing ePACE as the official
repository for all program documentation, including invoices and other
key administrative records
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 31, 2027
Please provide details of The Department is committed to obtaining outstanding deliverables and will work
corrective action or with relevant vendors to secure any missing required documentation, including
explain disagreement. reports, timesheets, payroll records, and receipts.
For certain contracts cited in the finding, the Department has confirmed that
required deliverables were provided or have since been resolved, and the
administration will document these resolutions for OLA’s review.
Where deliverables cannot be obtained, the Department will pursue recovery of
the related payments in accordance with its policy and applicable contract terms.
Page 24 of 24

--- Page 56 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Walter L. Horan, IV
Owen M. Long-Grant
Senior Auditors
Tari J. Covington
Albert S. Kim
Timothy Moon
Brian M. Webbert, CIA
Staff Auditors