Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2025
Date: 2026-07-20
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a5e77004e29e2565dadd870
Extracted: 2026-07-27T12:08:10.694182
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 20, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ms. Catherine J. Motz, Chair
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Ms. Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) by 15 of the
State’s community colleges for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2025.
Our review disclosed that the community colleges and their independent auditors
substantially complied with the applicable statutes and the guidelines promulgated
by MHEC. Specifically, all opinions expressed by the colleges’ independent
auditors stated that the applicable financial statements were presented fairly, in all
material respects, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America.
We did identify one audit report that did not comply with the American Institute
of Certified Public Accountants guidance. In addition, we noted three colleges
had deficit balances in unrestricted net position as of June 30, 2025, and one
college had deposits totaling $35,318 that were not fully collateralized or
otherwise insured as required by State law.

--- Page 4 ---
A draft copy of this report was provided to MHEC for review and comment.
Since there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not
necessary.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Purpose of Review and Background Information
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) by 15 of the
State’s community colleges1 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2025. We
reviewed these audit reports to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted
net position, or uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the
results of that review.
According to the State’s records, State aid totaling approximately $494.3 million
was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16 community colleges for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2025. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and student
enrollment data as well as certain retirement benefits and various grants.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires MHEC to adopt guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on
the colleges. The guidelines promulgated by MHEC as State regulations require
independent auditors to express opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the
colleges’ financial statements as well as of the cost and student enrollment data
used for calculating the State aid to the colleges. The guidelines also require the
auditors to issue management letters containing all material weaknesses in the
colleges’ systems of internal controls. While not required, many of the auditors
issue management letters that contain additional recommendations that were not
considered material weaknesses.
Furthermore, the guidelines require the audits to be conducted in accordance with
the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Industry Audit Guide:
Audits of Colleges and Universities and in compliance with generally accepted
auditing standards. All 15 audit reports expressed unqualified opinions. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
1 The sixteenth college is Baltimore City Community College (BCCC), which is a budgetary unit
of the State and receives an annual State appropriation. BCCC is not subject to the Education
Article, Section 16-315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, but obtains annual financial
statement audits conducted by a certified public accounting firm. BCCC is also subject to fiscal
compliance audits by the Office of Legislative Audits for which a separate audit report is issued.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
One audit report was not presented in accordance with American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) guidance.
One audit report was not presented in accordance with AICPA guidance.
Specifically, the Community College of Baltimore County audit report did not
express an opinion on the College’s Fiduciary Funds which is a unit included in
the College’s basic financial statements. The AICPA audit guidance requires an
opinion for all units included within the basic financial statements. A similar
condition was noted in our prior review report dated August 12, 2025.
Financial Statements
Three community colleges had deficit balances in the unrestricted portion of
their net position as of June 30, 2025.
Our review disclosed three colleges with deficit balances in the unrestricted
component of their net position as of June 30, 2025. This has been a long-
standing condition at each of these colleges (see Figure 1). An unrestricted net
position deficit balance represents expenses for current or past services that will
need to be financed with funds related to future periods and could indicate a
potential financial problem.
Figure 1
Colleges with Deficit Unrestricted Balances as of June 30, 2025
Condition
College Deficit Repeated Since
Fiscal Year
Anne Arundel Community College $29,152,384 2011
Community College of Baltimore County $99,047,251 2016
Carroll Community College $14,150,271 2009
4

--- Page 7 ---
Uncollateralized Funds
Financial statements submitted by one community college contained
disclosures that cash deposits were not adequately collateralized, or
otherwise insured, as required by State law.
The financial statements submitted by Garrett College contained a disclosure that
cash deposits totaling $35,318 were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise
insured. The Local Government Article, Section 17-101 of the Annotated Code
of Maryland requires that deposits with financial institutions by local
governmental units be fully collateralized. Full collateralization minimizes the
risk of loss of deposits in the event the financial institution defaults. In addition,
this law requires that collateral be of the types specified in the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 6-202 of the Code.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
John B. Wachter, CFE
Senior Auditor
Matthew P. Henry
Timothy Moon
Staff Auditors