Title: Office of the Secretary of State
Date: 2026-07-29
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6a70944ac71c025ddac1b105
Extracted: 2026-08-10T11:28:26.053239
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Secretary of State
July 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 29, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary of
State for the period beginning November 16, 2021 and ending November 30,
2025. Under the Maryland Constitution and State statutes, the Office performs a
variety of duties including attesting to the Governor’s signature on all public
papers, registering and regulating charitable organizations, administering the
Notary Public laws, administering the Address Confidentiality Program, and
compiling and publishing the State’s administrative regulations.
Our audit disclosed that the Office did not ensure that charitable organization
information was accurately migrated from its legacy database system to its new
automated system resulting in certain errors going undetected. The Office
transitioned from the legacy database to Maryland OneStop in August 2022.
According to the Office’s records, as of January 2026, there were 23,683 active
Maryland registered organizations. Our test of information transferred for 20
organizations disclosed that certain information for 3 organizations did not
transfer properly and was not timely identified and corrected.
Our audit also disclosed the Office did not ensure the vendor administering the
Maryland Charity Campaign properly disbursed funds to designated charities.
For example, the Office did not maintain an independent record of employee
contributions and the amount to be paid to the respective charities to enable a
verification. In addition, the Office did not obtain audits of the vendor’s financial
statement records, as required. Furthermore, the Office did not verify the
propriety of the administrative fees withheld by the vendor, which totaled
approximately $304,000 for the 2024 campaign year.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit also disclosed that the Office did not establish adequate controls over its
collections to provide assurance all collections were subsequently deposited. For
example, the Office did not verify that electronic payments processed by its third-
party credit card vendor were properly credited to the State’s accounts. Similar
conditions have been commented upon in one or more of our four preceding audit
reports dating back to November 2011 but were not sufficiently corrected.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
The Office’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of the Office’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding. In accordance with State law, we
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations and will notify the Office of any needed clarification to ensure
the responses sufficiently address the related findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Charitable Organizations
Finding 1 – The Office did not ensure that charitable organization 7
information was accurately migrated from its legacy database to its new
automated system resulting in certain errors going undetected.
Maryland Charity Campaign
Finding 2 – The Office did not ensure the vendor administering the 8
Maryland Charity Campaign properly disbursed the funds to
designated charities. In addition, the Office did not ensure the
vendor obtained required audits and that administrative fees
retained by the vendor were proper.
Collections
* Finding 3 – The Office did not establish adequate controls over 10
collections.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Secretary of State attests to the Governor's signature on all
public papers and documents, and is the repository for the Governor's Executive
Orders. The Office's many other duties and responsibilities include the following:
 The Charities and Legal Services Division registers, regulates, and informs the
public about charitable organizations (including foundations affiliated with
State agencies) and professional solicitors; manages the Maryland Charity
Campaign; administers the Notary Public laws and issues Notary Public
commissions; prepares and processes extraditions and requisitions issued by
the Governor; and registers public offering statements for condominiums and
timeshares.
 The Administration and Finance Division registers trademarks and
administers certifications and apostilles for documents for international use.
 The Division of State Documents compiles and publishes all of the State's
administrative regulations in the Maryland Register and the Code of Maryland
Regulations (COMAR).
 The Safety and Support Services Division administers the Maryland Safe at
Home Address Confidentiality Program, which is designed to protect victims
of domestic violence by providing them with an alternate mailing address to
prevent offenders from locating them.
According to the State's records, the Office’s expenditures during fiscal year 2025
totaled approximately $5.6 million (see Figure 1).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
Secretary of State Positions, Expenditures, and
Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 28
Vacant 1
Total 29
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages & Fringe Benefits $4,053,756
Technical and Special Fees 499,001
Operating Expenses 1,083,458
Total $5,636,215
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $3,223,238
Special Fund 2,186,022
Reimbursable Fund 226,955
Total $5,636,215
Source: State financial and personnel records
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 1, 2022. See Figure 2 for the results of
our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Office of the Secretary of State did not
conduct independent reviews since August 2020
to ensure that critical data obtained from
Finding 1 Not repeated
charitable organizations was accurately recorded,
and that these organizations submitted the proper
amount of fees.
The Office did not investigate charitable
organizations that failed to comply with the
annual registration requirements of State law. In
Finding 2 Not repeated
addition, the Office did not monitor related fees
incurred by delinquent organizations and refer
accounts to the State's Central Collections Unit.
Adequate controls were not established over cash Repeated
Finding 3
receipts. (Current Finding 3)
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Charitable Organizations
Background
State law requires charitable organizations in Maryland to register with the
Secretary of State and renew the registration annually within six months of the
end of the organization’s fiscal year. State law also requires the organization to
pay an annual registration fee of up to $300 depending on the total contributions
received for the reporting year. Organizations that are late in meeting the
requirements are assessed a fee of $25 per month, which accrues indefinitely until
the organization achieves compliance.
According to the Office’s records, as of January 20, 2026, there were 23,683
active Maryland registered organizations. During fiscal year 2025, the Office
recorded revenue from registration fees, renewal fees, and fines totaling
approximately $2.9 million.
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure that charitable organization information was
accurately migrated from its legacy database to its new automated system
resulting in certain errors going undetected.
Analysis
The Office did not ensure that charitable organization information was accurately
migrated from its legacy database to its new automated system resulting in certain
errors going undetected. In August 2022, the Office transitioned from its legacy
database to Maryland OneStop. The new system automated the registration
application process that previously relied on manual forms being submitted and
entered into the legacy database by Office employees. Maintaining accurate
information is important because it is used to monitor organization compliance
with reporting requirements, determine the amounts of annual registration fees,
and is used by the general public to make informed decisions about charitable
contributions.
Our review disclosed that the Office could not document that it ensured the
information was migrated properly. Specifically, we were advised by Office
management that limited testing was performed when the new system was
implemented but the Office could not document these efforts. Rather, the Office
could only document corrections made to individual records as it became aware of
errors.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our test of information transferred for 20 organizations disclosed that certain
information for 3 organizations did not transfer properly and was not timely
identified and corrected.1 For example, the Office ordered 1 organization to cease
and desist2 soliciting in 2013 due to certain noncompliance issues but the
organization was recorded as current in Maryland OneStop when the data was
transferred. Another organization was recorded as non-current when they were
exempt and should have been recorded as such. The aforementioned organization
with a cease and desist order was corrected on the system in January 2025 (more
than two years after the data migration). As of April 2026, the status for the
aforementioned exempt organization and the third organization tested had still not
been corrected.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office verify that information was accurately
migrated into Maryland OneStop, and correct any errors including those
noted above.
Maryland Charity Campaign
We determined that a portion of Finding 2 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined
by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of a portion of the following finding,
including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with Office’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 2
The Office did not ensure that the vendor administering the Maryland
Charity Campaign (MCC) properly disbursed the funds to designated
charities. In addition, the Office did not ensure the vendor obtained
required audits and that administrative fees retained by the vendor were
proper.
Analysis
The Office did not ensure that the vendor administering the MCC properly
disbursed the funds to designated charities. In addition, the Office did not ensure
the vendor obtained required audits and that administrative fees retained by the
1 Test items were selected as of April 14, 2026 based on registration status and type.
2 As of April 2026, there were 11 organizations under a cease-and-desist order.
8

--- Page 11 ---
vendor were proper. The MCC is a workplace giving program, overseen by the
Office, that allows State employees and eligible retirees to donate to approved
charities. According to the vendor’s records, donations totaled approximately
$1.7 million between April 2024 and March 2025.
 The Office did not verify that the MCC vendor disbursed the proper amount to
charities. Specifically, the Office did not maintain an independent record of
employee contributions and the amount to be paid to the respective charities to
enable a verification to occur. In addition, the Office did not attempt to
confirm with the charities that amounts reported as disbursed by the MCC
vendor were received. We were able to confirm certain amounts reported by
the MCC vendor were received by the charities but due to the lack of readily
available records, we could not verify that all amounts contributed were
properly disbursed.
 The Office did not ensure the MCC vendor obtained required financial
statement audits. The contract provided that the MCC vendor was to obtain
audited financial statements certified by an independent accountant annually.
Without this certification, the Office lacked assurance that the MCC’s records
were accurate, including the accuracy of the administrative fee it retained.
Subsequent to our request, the Office obtained copies of these audits.
 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
 The Office did not verify the propriety of the administrative fee withheld by
the vendor, which totaled approximately $242,000, $229,000, and $304,000
during the 2022, 2023, and 2024 campaign years, respectively. The contract
with the MCC vendor provided that they could retain up to 20 percent of the
prior year pledges to cover actual expenditures in accordance with a budget
submitted to the Office. Our review disclosed that the Office did not obtain
documentation to support the expenses reported by the vendor to ensure the
fees retained were proper.3 In this regard, our review disclosed that $59,760
of the expenses reported for the 2024 campaign were estimated rather than
actual expenses which was not consistent with the contract.
3 While we noted that certain information was included in the audited financial statements, as
noted above these statements were not obtained to verify the fee and our review disclosed that the
information in the audited statements were not sufficiently detailed to verify the fees.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that amounts contributed by employees are properly disbursed to
the charities,
b. obtain and review required audits and take appropriate corrective action
for any issues identified, and
c. verify the propriety of the administrative fee withheld by the vendor and
recover any amounts that are not supported.
Collections
Finding 3
The Office did not establish adequate controls over collections.
Analysis
The Office did not establish adequate controls over collections. According to
State records, the Office deposited approximately $15.5 million during the period
from November 16, 2021 to November 30, 2025, which included electronic
collections (such as credit card payments) totaling $9.9 million and check and
money orders totaling $5.6 million. These collections primarily related to
charitable registration and enforcement fees, document certification fees, and
notary commissions.
 The Office did not verify that electronic payments processed by its third-party
credit card vendor were properly credited to one of the multiple bank accounts
used for the various types of collections received by its units. Our review
disclosed that the Office did not reconcile reported electronic collections to
the State’s bank accounts to ensure the funds were received. Our test of credit
card transactions for 21 arbitrarily selected days totaling approximately
$510,000, disclosed that the Office could not provide certain bank statements
to support that $374,000 in collections were credited to one of the State’s bank
accounts.
 Collections received by mail (including checks and money orders) were not
always restrictively endorsed and recorded upon receipt and were not properly
safeguarded. Specifically, Office management advised us that checks received
by mail are recorded and endorsed throughout the day as time permits. In
addition, these checks were not properly safeguarded as we observed several
instances when unendorsed and unrecorded checks were left in an unsecured
bin accessible to Office personnel. Furthermore, the Office could not readily
10

--- Page 13 ---
provide a listing of checks received by mail since they were recorded in the
same manner as walk-in checks.
 The employee who verified that recorded collections were deposited also
prepared the deposit and could modify the initial record of collections. In
addition, this employee could void transactions without subsequent
independent approval. Based on the Office’s records, 1,011 voids were
processed during the audit period. The Office could not readily identify the
voids processed by this employee but during the prior audit this employee
processed 88 percent of the voided transactions. Our test of 11 of the voids4
totaling approximately $51,000, including 10 by this employee, disclosed 4
voids totaling $775 that were not supported. For example, the Office did not
retain documentation for one void that reduced a deposit by $250 and Office
personnel could not justify the void from the available information.
 The Office did not ensure that collections were deposited within 1 working
day of receipt, as required. Our test of collections from 21 arbitrarily selected
days totaling $174,000 disclosed that collections received on 5 days totaling
$39,000 were deposited between 8 and 15 days after receipt.
Under these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could occur without timely
detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policies and Procedures
Manual requires checks to be immediately endorsed and recorded upon receipt
and adequately safeguarded. The Manual also requires that deposit verifications
and void processing be performed by an employee independent of the cash
receipts function and that the voids be independently reviewed and approved.
Finally, the Manual generally requires that collections be deposited by the next
business day.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of independent deposit verifications and
review of voids were commented upon in our four preceding audit reports dating
back to 2011, and the lack of a verification that credit card receipts were properly
credited to the State’s bank account was commented upon in our three preceding
audit reports dating back to 2015. In response to our prior report, the Office
indicated it would implement proper procedures and controls by June 2022. The
Office’s management advised us that they did not implement proper procedures
and the conditions were not sufficiently corrected, primarily due to staffing
challenges and changes in systems during the audit period.
4 Voided transactions were selected for testing based on either materiality or whether they were
processed by the employee with excessive control.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that an employee independent of the collection process verifies
that all collections, including credit card transactions, are subsequently
deposited/credited to the State’s bank account (repeat);
b. record and restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt and
ensure checks are safeguarded prior to deposit;
c. independently verify that voided transactions are proper and supported
(repeat) including those noted above; and
d. ensure cash receipts are deposited timely.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary of
State for the period beginning November 16, 2021 and ending November 30,
2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included charitable organizations, cash receipts,
information systems security, and the Maryland Safe at Home Address
Confidentiality Program. We also determined the status of the findings contained
in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Executive Department – Governor. These support services (such as
maintenance of accounting records and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of the Executive Department – Governor.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 16, 2021 to November 30, 2025, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, test of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
13

--- Page 16 ---
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from the Office’s automated systems used to record
information relating to charitable organizations and notarial commissions for the
purpose of testing the Office’s procedures for ensuring compliance with certain
requirements in the law applicable to charitable organizations and notarial
commissions. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined
that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during
the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a certain finding in this report
falls under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report
all specifics as to the nature of this cybersecurity finding and required corrective
actions have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned
practices, and government auditing standards, support the redaction of this
information from the public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity
finding have been communicated to the Office and those parties responsible for
acting on our recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the results of our review
of its response.
15

--- Page 18 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 20 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Charitable Organizations
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure that charitable organization information was
accurately migrated from its legacy database to its new automated system
resulting in certain errors going undetected.
We recommend that the Office verify that information was accurately
migrated into Maryland OneStop, and correct any errors including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Office of the Secretary of State (OSOS) is committed to ensuring that its
additional comments as public registry remains a reliable tool for Marylanders to cross reference
deemed necessary. charitable organizations registered in the state through Maryland OneStop.
OSOS’ transition from its legacy database to OneStop in 2022 was overseen by
the previous administration, which auditors discovered did not fully transfer
past compliance information to the new system or document testing efforts to
verify the accuracy of information at the time of the transition. Since this issue
was identified, OSOS has corrected every inconsistency named in this audit
finding, and will use a systemic approach to review the over 29,000 entities
transferred during the initial migration, with a goal to ensure any additional
errors are identified and corrected by the end of 2026.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 31,
2026
Please provide details of As of July 2026, OSOS has reviewed all test cases identified in the audit
corrective action or finding, including the organization with a cease and desist order, to ensure they
explain disagreement. have been updated to correctly reflect their standing with OSOS in the public
registry. Additionally, all 11 organizations under a cease and desist order as of
April 14, 2026 have been manually reviewed to ensure each one is correctly
labeled in the registry. In lieu of testing documentation available during the
prior administration, OSOS will perform a comprehensive and systemic review
of charitable organizations listed in the public registry to correct any other
possible inconsistencies, with plans to complete this review by the end of 2026.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Maryland Charity Campaign
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that a portion of Finding
2 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is
subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of a portion
of the following finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along
with the Office’s responses, have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 2
The Office did not ensure that the vendor administering the Maryland
Charity Campaign (MCC) properly disbursed the funds to designated
charities. In addition, the Office did not ensure the vendor obtained
required audits and that administrative fees retained by the vendor were
proper.
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that amounts contributed by employees are properly disbursed to
the charities,
b. obtain and review required audits and take appropriate corrective action
for any issues identified, and
c. verify the propriety of the administrative fee withheld by the vendor and
recover any amounts that are not supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide While OSOS manages the state’s contract with the vendor responsible for
additional comments as administering the Maryland Charity Campaign (MCC) as the state entity
deemed necessary. responsible for overseeing the Campaign, monitoring the collection of
employee contributions and disbursement to participating charities is managed
by the Office of the Comptroller and the MCC vendor directly. In this regard,
the Comptroller 1) collects and aggregates pledges from state employees and
retirees that participate in the program through voluntary payroll deductions, 2)
retains a record of the total amount due to each charity, and 3) transfers these
funds to the vendor for distribution to each charity in accordance with the
Comptroller’s records.
To protect the privacy of employees and retirees, individual contributions are
kept confidential, and OSOS does not access that information. To ensure the
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
propriety of the vendor’s disbursements to charities and retention of a portion
of these funds in accordance with its contract, OSOS receives a copy of the
Comptroller’s records from the vendor. In addition, OSOS has received copies
of regular independent financial audits from the vendor as required in the
contract to ensure the vendors records and retained fees are proper.
Nonetheless, OSOS recognizes that its verification controls around the
Campaign’s vendor disbursements can always be improved, and will ensure
action is promptly taken to allow for stronger verification of contributions.
The Maryland Charity Campaign (MCC) is a reliable and easy way for
Maryland State Employees and retirees to pledge money to the vetted charities
of their choice, and for charities to gather and monitor donations from state
employees and retirees. Notably, neither the Office of the Comptroller nor
participating charities have expressed any discrepancy that would indicate any
improper payments were made by the vendor, underscoring the efficacy of
controls currently in place for the MCC.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2027
Please provide details of To protect the privacy of employees and retirees that participate in the
corrective action or Maryland Charity Campaign, information about individual contributions is
explain disagreement. retained solely by the Office of the Comptroller, who provides aggregate
information to the MCC vendor to ensure amounts are distributed to the
charities. Moving forward, OSOS will obtain copies of these records directly
from the Comptroller to ensure it can independently cross-reference and verify
documentation provided by the Comptroller to the vendor.
OSOS has no indication that the employee’s pledges are not reaching the
intended charities. While agency operating procedures can be changed
promptly, because the MCC operates in an 18-month cycle from beginning to
end, OSOS will be able to verify and audit by June 2027.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed,
June 2026
Please provide details of As required by the contract, the vendor has retained regular independent
corrective action or financial audits and proactively shared them with OSOS. The audited financial
explain disagreement. statements were subsequently provided by email to OLA on June 17th, as OLA
acknowledges in the finding.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2027
Please provide details of OSOS does verify the propriety of the administrative fee withheld by the
corrective action or vendor, which has averaged 12%-15% of the pledged amounts, and has never
explain disagreement. exceeded the 20% cap provided under the contract. Supporting documentation
from the Comptroller and independent audits have consistently affirmed the
propriety of the vendor’s retained fees. Nonetheless, OSOS will use records
independently obtained to verify the propriety of any administrative fees
charged by the vendor with the Comptroller to ensure that fee amounts remain
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
proper going forward. OSOS has no indication that the administrative fees have
been unsupported or excessive. While agency operating procedures can be
changed promptly, because the MCC operates in an 18-month cycle from
beginning to end, OSOS will be able to verify and audit by June 2027.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Collections
Finding 3
The Office did not establish adequate controls over collections.
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that an employee independent of the collection process verifies
that all collections, including credit card transactions, are subsequently
deposited/credited to the State’s bank account (repeat);
b. record and restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt and
ensure checks are safeguarded prior to deposit;
c. independently verify that voided transactions are proper and supported
(repeat) including those noted above; and
d. ensure cash receipts are deposited timely.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide OSOS possesses the capacity to monitor and verify the status of all deposited
additional comments as collections through the review and monitoring of bank statements (check
deemed necessary. deposits) and online accounts (credit card deposits). All funds are
comprehensively accounted for, and multiple verification protocols have been
established to guarantee that all monies transmitted to the office are accurately
recorded and align precisely with actual deposits.
During the audit period, the Administration and Finance Division did not have
the staff or systems in place to establish adequate controls over collections.
Going forward, the Division will have in place two staff members (the Director
and a recently hired assistant) who will be able to independently monitor and
verify collections of the staff who handle collections.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 31,
2026
Please provide details of After the audit period concluded, OSOS obtained bank statements to verify that
corrective action or all of the $374,000 in collections identified in this finding were properly
explain disagreement. credited to the State’s bank accounts and is fully accounted for at this time.
The Director of Administration and Finance Division of the OSOS will
independently verify deposits and ensure transactions match with a full
justification for reviewability.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 31,
2026
Please provide details of The Director of Administration and Finance Division of the OSOS will
corrective action or implement new standard operating procedures regarding check handling
explain disagreement. and processing to ensure that checks are recorded and restrictively
endorsed immediately upon receipt and ensure checks are properly
safeguarded prior to deposit.
The Division will be ordering an endorsement stamp that has a
restrictive endorsement that would not allow further presentment of
checks and order paper to any party other than the Comptroller.
Unprocessed checks are being safeguarded by locking them in a safe
onsite until they can be processed the next day.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 31,
2026
Please provide details of The Director of Administration and Finance Division of the OSOS will ensure
corrective action or that standard operating procedures for processing chargebacks and voided
explain disagreement. transactions are proper and supported by documentation.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 31,
2026
Please provide details of The Director of Administration and Finance Division of the OSOS will ensure
corrective action or that cash receipts are deposited timely. OSOS notes that checks, money orders,
explain disagreement. and debit and credit cards are the only permissible tender for OSOS services.
No cash transactions are allowed.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Principal Information Systems Auditor
Thea A. Chimento, CFE
Senior Auditor
Emily M. Hofstaedter
Chau D. Mai
Staff Auditors
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditor