Title: Prescription Drug Affordability Board
Date: 2026-08-19
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6a85f7b1615b84a2b7118d55
Extracted: 2026-08-31T11:18:16.290727
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Prescription Drug Affordability Board
August 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 19, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Prescription Drug
Affordability Board (PDAB) for the period beginning July 1, 2022 and ending
March 22, 2026. PDAB is tasked with protecting Maryland residents and the
State’s health care system from the high costs of prescription drug products.
Our audit disclosed that PDAB did not ensure annual fees assessed on health
insurance carriers, pharmacy benefit managers, prescription drug manufacturers,
and wholesale distributors who sell prescription drugs in Maryland were properly
controlled and accounted for and did not adequately pursue outstanding fees.
PDAB’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response which indicates
disagreement with certain aspects of the analysis and related recommendations.
In each instance we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within
PDAB’s response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
PDAB.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
PDAB.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Creation and Responsibilities
Chapter 692, Laws of Maryland 2019, effective July 1, 2019, established the
Prescription Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) as an independent unit of State
government to protect Maryland residents, State and local governments, and other
stakeholders within the State’s health care system from the high costs of
prescription drug products. The Board consists of five members and five alternate
members. The Governor, Senate President, House Speaker, and Attorney General
each appoint one member and one alternate to five-year terms. The Senate
President and House Speaker jointly choose the Chair. The Attorney General is
the legal advisor to the Board.
In accordance with State law and regulations, PDAB conducts comprehensive
reviews to identify drugs that pose affordability challenges or create access issues
for Marylanders. For drugs found to be unaffordable, PDAB is authorized to take
certain actions including establishing Upper Payment Limits (UPLs) for the
drugs. As of May 2026, PDAB has proposed regulations to establish UPLs for
two prescription drugs.
From July 1, 2019 to June 30, 2022, PDAB was staffed and funded by the
Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC). The activities of PDAB during this
period were included in our audit of the Health Regulatory Commissions (which
include MHCC). Activity since PDAB received its first independent budget in
fiscal year 2023 is covered in the scope of this audit.
According to State records, PDAB’s fiscal year 2025 expenditures totaled
approximately $1.1 million (see Figure 1), which were funded entirely through
annual fees assessed to health insurance carriers, pharmacy benefit managers, and
prescription drug manufacturers and wholesale distributors who sell or offer for
sale prescription drugs to persons in Maryland. During the period of June 30,
2023 through June 30, 2025, PDAB had vacancy rates that ranged from 20
percent to 40 percent. As of June 30, 2025, 40 percent of the five total positions
were vacant. These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the
finding in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
PDAB Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Source
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 3
Vacant 2
Total 5
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 755,971
Technical and Special Fees 108,645
Operating Expenses 199,831
Total $1,064,447
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Source
Funding
Special Fund $1,064,447
Total $1,064,447
Source: State financial and personnel records
Findings and Recommendations
Annual Fees
Finding 1
The Prescription Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) did not ensure annual
fees on health insurance carriers, pharmacy benefit managers, prescription
drug manufacturers, and wholesale distributors were properly assessed and
accounted for, and outstanding fees were adequately pursued.
Analysis
PDAB did not ensure annual fees on health insurance carriers, pharmacy benefit
managers, and prescription drug manufacturers and wholesale distributors who
sell or offer for sale prescription drugs to persons in Maryland, were properly
assessed and accounted for, and outstanding fees were adequately pursued.
PDAB periodically receives listings of these entities and the related addresses
4

--- Page 7 ---
from the Maryland Board of Pharmacy (Board) and the Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA). PDAB is responsible for sending out notices for the
annual $1,000 fee assessed on each entity, processing the related collections, and
pursuing outstanding fees.
According to the State’s accounting records, PDAB collected approximately $4.6
million between July 2022 and March 2026 including checks totaling $3.6 million
and electronic collections totaling $969,000. According to PDAB’s records, as of
April 2026, outstanding fees totaled $1.4 million, including $338,000 that had
been referred to the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU). As noted in the
background of this report, PDAB’s operations are funded entirely by these fees.1
 PDAB did not follow up with the Board and MIA to obtain valid addresses
when fee assessment letters were returned as undeliverable. Between fiscal
year 2023 and 2026, PDAB received undeliverable notices for 169 entities
with annual fees totaling $342,000. As of April 2026, PDAB had not
contacted the Board or MIA to obtain valid addresses and, consequently, these
funds had not been pursued for collection. PDAB management advised that
the Board or MIA would not be helpful in obtaining correct addresses because
this is who originally provided that information. However, an updated list is
provided by the Board every two years and by MIA annually, and they may
have updated address information.
 PDAB did not segregate collection and accounts receivable duties and did not
independently verify that fees were properly deposited. Specifically, the
employee responsible for preparing checks for deposit was also responsible
for updating the related accounts receivable records and a different employee
who was responsible for scanning checks for deposit was also responsible for
verifying the funds were deposited. In addition, the deposit verification did
not verify that the funds were actually deposited in the bank and instead
reconciled the recorded checks to a manual listing of deposits. As a result,
collections could be misappropriated and not be readily detected. Based on
our test of 15 arbitrarily selected assessments, we noted that these assessments
tested were received and deposited intact.2
 PDAB did not refer all delinquent accounts to CCU as required by State
regulations. PDAB management advised that the Board approved the decision
not to refer delinquent accounts to CCU but could not provide any
documentation of the Board’s approval or that CCU exempted them from
1 PDAB maintains the Prescription Drug Affordability Fund, which as of June 30, 2025, had an
ending balance of $1.6 million.
2 Tested fees were deposited between October 2023 and October 2025.
5

--- Page 8 ---
referring accounts. According to PDAB’s records as of April 2026, there
were 572 delinquent accounts totaling $673,000 that, based on their age,
should have been referred to CCU. This included 210 accounts with
delinquent fees assessed in fiscal year 2023 totaling $210,000. Delays in the
pursuit of delinquent accounts may decrease the likelihood of collecting the
funds.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual
requires that receipts recorded on initial source documents be traced to deposit by
an employee independent of the cash receipts function. In addition, the Manual
requires segregation of the cash receipts handling duties and accounts receivable
recordation duties. Furthermore, State regulations require that delinquent
accounts be referred to CCU after three written demands at 30-day intervals.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PDAB
a. work with the Board and MIA to obtain correct addresses when
assessment notices are returned, including those noted above;
b. segregate the duties of processing collections, maintaining accounts
receivable records and verifying collections were deposited;
c. perform and document an independent verification of collections from
the initial record of receipt to amounts deposited per the bank; and
d. refer delinquent accounts to CCU as required, including those noted
above.
We advised PDAB on how to achieve the necessary segregation of duties
using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Prescription Drug
Affordability Board (PDAB) for the period beginning July 1, 2022 and ending
March 22, 2026. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine PDAB’s financial
6

--- Page 9 ---
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, accounts receivable, board
operations, and payroll.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to PDAB by the
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM). These support services (such as human resources, certain
payroll activities, purchasing, and maintenance of accounting records) are
included within the scope of our audits of MHBE and DBM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2022 to March 22, 2026, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of PDAB’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data), the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
7

--- Page 10 ---
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
PDAB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to PDAB, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect PDAB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to PDAB that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
PDAB’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise PDAB regarding the
results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
16900 Science Drive
Suite 112-114
Bowie, MD 20715
pdab.maryland.gov
August 11, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report concerning the Maryland
Prescription Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) for the period beginning July 1, 2022 and ending
March 22, 2026.
The Prescription Drug Affordability Board appreciates the opportunity to respond to the
audit findings and values accountability, continuous improvement, and responsible stewardship
of State resources while fulfilling its duty to make prescription drugs more affordable.
As outlined in the responses that follow, the PDAB acknowledges opportunities to strengthen
the fee assessment process and certain internal controls. At the same time, it is important to
emphasize the unique context in which these findings originated. The PDAB is a very small
state agency with limited resources, tasked with developing and managing a fee assessment
that is time and labor intensive. The fee assessment applies to entities that the PDAB does not
directly license or regulate. The PDAB has continued to improve this process over time.
PDAB has already implemented process improvements to address the finding and
recommendations and initiated corrective action where applicable. The agency will continue to
implement and test sustainable improvements while continuing to fulfill its mission.
If you have any questions, please contact Andrew York at 410-804-0251 or email at
andrew.york@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Andrew York, Executive Director
Maryland Prescription Drug Affordability Board
Cc: Bonnie Cullison, Board Chair

--- Page 12 ---
Prescription Drug Affordability Board
Agency Response Form
Annual Fees
Finding 1
The Prescription Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) did not ensure annual
fees on health insurance carriers, pharmacy benefit managers, prescription
drug manufacturers, and wholesale distributors were properly assessed and
accounted for, and outstanding fees were adequately pursued.
We recommend that PDAB
a. work with the Board and MIA to obtain correct addresses when
assessment notices are returned, including those noted above;
b. segregate the duties of processing collections, maintaining accounts
receivable records and verifying collections were deposited;
c. perform and document an independent verification of collections from
the initial record of receipt to amounts deposited per the bank; and
d. refer delinquent accounts to CCU as required, including those noted
above.
We advised PDAB on how to achieve the necessary segregation of duties
using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide a. The Board of Pharmacy licenses wholesale distributors, including
additional comments as certain manufacturers, to sell prescription drug products directly in the
deemed necessary. state. The license is good for two years and expires in May. See
https://health.maryland.gov/pharmacy/Pages/Establishments.aspx
PDAB obtains the list of licensed entities after that renewal
period/expiration date to coincide with its process for issuing
assessments in August. Thus, PDAB obtains the most recently available
addresses to issue the assessment. PDAB also obtains addresses from
MIA for the August assessment.
b. PDAB is budgeted for 5 FTE, but 1 position is the Assistant Attorney
General, who is not assigned collections and accounts receivable work.
For much of the covered time period, only 2 staff persons (and the
Assistant Attorney General) were working. There simply were no other
staff to perform segregated functions.
d. For an account to be declared delinquent, there must be a confirmed
debt and a demand for payment that is “properly addressed and delivered
to the debtor.”
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 13 ---
Prescription Drug Affordability Board
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 9/1/2026
Please provide details of Given that the MIA’s and the Board of Pharmacy’s recent records are
corrective action or the original source of addresses for distributors/manufacturers and
explain disagreement. carriers, PDAB disagrees with the assumption that better (correct)
addresses may be obtained from these agencies a few months later.
However, PDAB is working to establish a process to obtain address
updates from MIA and BoP when notices are returned, and to provide
the Board of Pharmacy and MIA with the addresses for which the
assessment has been returned as undeliverable.
Recommendation 1b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 9/1/2026
Please provide details of The PDAB worked with state experts to develop a process, consistent
corrective action or with PDAB’s small staff (4 staff and 1 Assistant Attorney General), that
explain disagreement. was understood to comply with the applicable state policies, processes,
and procedures. However, given the high vacancy rate (40%) and small
staff (2 staff and 1 Assistant Attorney General for much of the covered
time period) , PDAB lacked sufficient personnel to staff all segregable
functions. Based on this feedback, PDAB has updated its policies and
procedures and will continue to work with the Office of the Comptroller
to assign roles that meet the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Policies and Procedures Manual and other applicable state policies.
The PDAB will continue to work with other state experts to navigate the
unique staffing constraints to meet applicable state policies related to the
segregation of the processing of collections, maintaining accounts
receivable records, and verifying deposits duties.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/1/2026
Please provide details of The PDAB has updated its cash receivables process to include an
corrective action or independent verification of collections from the initial record of receipt
explain disagreement. to amounts deposited per the bank. Complete.
Recommendation 1d Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 6/1/2026
Please provide details of In accordance with law, the PDAB declares an account delinquent and
corrective action or refers it to CCU when the PDAB can confirm the entity, the obligation
explain disagreement. to pay, notice of the obligation to pay, and non-payment. That is, when
PDAB confirms that: (1) the assessed entity is a qualifying entity and
has been sent three notices of the Fee Assessment at an address of record
which have not been returned; and (2) any issue (request for waiver or
exemption) regarding the applicability of the assessment has been
resolved. Where the PDAB could not confirm the identity, obligation or
address of the entity, such accounts were not declared delinquent and
referred to CCU. As the fee assessment process and exemption process
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 14 ---
Prescription Drug Affordability Board
Agency Response Form
developed over time, the PDAB was able to confirm these elements,
declare the account delinquent, and refer the account for
collection. Starting in FY25, almost all accounts, except those with
incorrect addresses (returned undeliverable), have been declared
delinquent and referred to CCU. The PDAB expects to maintain a
effective close-out rate moving forward.
Auditor’s Comment: PDAB’s response indicates disagreement with several
recommendations. However, the ensuing comments do not contradict our
analysis and indicate that they agree to implement each of the recommendations.
In each instance we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. Accordingly, we stand by the factual
accuracy of the finding and the related recommendations.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 15 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Staff Auditor