Title: Harford County Public Schools
Date: 2026-08-25
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6a907de6fd57d1c9c3e9a331
Extracted: 2026-08-31T11:18:06.460572
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Harford County Public Schools
August 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 25, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Harford
County Public Schools (HCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether HCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that HCPS did not publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage as required by State law and instead posted a link to the
awards listed on their website. In addition, HCPS did not execute written
contracts and did not obtain approval from the Harford County Board of
Education for special education services. Our audit also disclosed that HCPS’
equipment policies were not comprehensive, detail records were incomplete, and
physical inventories were not conducted. Similar conditions regarding equipment
have been included but not corrected from prior reports dating back to 2008.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.

--- Page 4 ---
HCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of HCPS’ response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to our findings and
related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
HCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 9
External Audits 10
Cybersecurity Incident 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Revenue and Billing Cycle 13
Federal Funds 14
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Harford County Public Schools (HCPS) did not publish 16
contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as
required by State procurement law.
Finding 2 – HCPS did not execute formal written contracts and did not 16
obtain approval from the Harford County Board of Education for
certain special education services.
Human Resources and Payroll 17
Equipment Control and Accountability
* Finding 3 – HCPS’ equipment policies were not comprehensive, detail 18
records were incomplete, and physical inventories were not
conducted.
Information Technology
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 20
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 20
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 20
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Transportation Services 21
Food Services 21
School Board Oversight 22
Management of Other Risks 22
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 24
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Harford County Public Schools (HCPS) ranks
8th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland. Fiscal
year 2025 full-time student enrollment was 37,771 students. HCPS had 52
schools, consisting of 33 elementary, 7 middle, 8 high schools, 2 middle/high
schools, and 2 other types of schools (including special education and alternative).
Funding
HCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Harford County, the
State, and federal government. According to the HCPS' audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $841.2 million in
fiscal year 2025, including $395.4 million from the State. See Figure 1 for
HCPS’ enrollment and funding by source for the six-year period from fiscal year
2020 through fiscal year 2025. See Figure 2 for revenue sources per enrolled
student in fiscal year 2025 according to its audited financial statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
HCPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2020 through 2025
(dollar amoun ts in millions)
38,429
38,037
37,920
38,105
37,333
37,771
$395
$376 $373
$345 $344
$305 $320 $314 $298
$276 $276
$259
$114 $94 $101
$76 $73
$46
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Enrollment Local State Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2025 included the following:
 $305.6 million for Foundation Formula Grants
 $39.5 million for Capital Projects
 $36.1 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
 $14.2 million for Other State Funding
Source: HCPS’ Fiscal Year 2025 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
HCPS Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2025
Other
$748
4%
Local
$9,866
Federal
44%
$1,189
5%
State
$10,468
47%
Source: HCPS’ Fiscal Year 2025 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland’s early childhood, primary, and
secondary education system to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Poverty Aid, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides
additional funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as,
Prekindergarten Aid).
Expenditures
According to HCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2025 expenditures
were approximately $886.3 million. The largest expenditure category was
salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 69
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2025. According to MSDE
records, during the 2024-2025 school year, HCPS had 5,457 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 4,017 instructional and 1,440 non-instructional.
Instruction accounted for 54 percent of HCPS' expenditures on a categorical basis
(see Figure 3).
Figure 3
HCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2025
(dollar amounts in millions)
$480.3
Instruction
54%
$153.8
Facilities & Capital Projects
17%
Enrollment
$103.7
Special Education 12% 37,771
$79.7
Administration & Support 9% Employees
5,457
$45.1
Transportation
5%
Cost Per Pupil
$23.7 $23,466
Food Service
3%
Source: HCPS’ Fiscal Year 2025 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
8

--- Page 11 ---
Oversight
HCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of six elected voting
members, three appointed voting members, the county superintendent of schools,
who is an ex officio non-voting member, and one elected voting student member.
MSDE exercises considerable oversight of HCPS through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with HCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal
law. The Harford County government also exercises authority over HCPS
primarily through the review and approval of HCPS’ annual operating and capital
budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a seven-member
Board appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
Board Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker
of the House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, MSDE, and the Interagency Commission on School
Construction. Specifically, the law provides that the OIGE may receive and
investigate information and complaints concerning potential fraud, waste, and
abuse of public funds and property; civil rights violations involving students or
employees; whether policies and procedures governing the prevention and
reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with applicable federal and State
laws; and compliance with other applicable federal and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
9

--- Page 12 ---
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
review, the OIGE issued two public reports related to HCPS reviews and
investigations. We considered these reports during our current audit.
External Audits
As required by State law, HCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of HCPS as of June 30, 2020, 2021,
2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025 and the respective changes in its financial position
and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
HCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of HCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independent audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
HCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance
to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the
entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2020 through 2025. We examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2025 financial statement audit and the fiscal year 2024 Single
Audit, which were the latest available during our audit fieldwork. Our review did
not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in this report. In addition,
certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm, which we
determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a
result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the following areas:
 State and local government revenues received via electronic fund transfer
 Accounts receivable
 Federal grant activity
10

--- Page 13 ---
Cybersecurity Incident
In May 2026, a learning management system vendor used by HCPS suffered
cybersecurity breaches and threats of data loss. HCPS student information listed
on the platform included names, grades, and enrolled school. Due to the incident,
on May 7, 2026, the platform was taken down and inaccessible. On May 11,
2026, the platform regained operational status and the vendor claimed to have
reached an agreement with the parties responsible for the breach. HCPS is still
investigating and assessing potential ramifications of the breach on its data
including sensitive student information.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the twelve findings
contained in the March 24, 2021 report. See Figure 4 for the results of our
review.
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
HCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain
recognized best practices or requirements of State law Not repeated
Finding 1
when evaluating the merits of participation in
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Certain transactions processed on its automated system
were not subject to independent review and approval and Not repeated
Finding 2
verified to appropriate supporting documentation after
being entered into the system.
HCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll Not repeated
Finding 3
transactions were independently reviewed for propriety.
HCPS’ equipment policies were not comprehensive, detail
Repeated
Finding 4 records were incomplete, and physical inventories were
(Current Finding 3)
not conducted.
Finding 5 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
2 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
has been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 6 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
Finding 7 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
Finding 8 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.3 Status Redacted3
HCPS did not perform preventive maintenance in Not repeated
Finding 9
accordance with its Comprehensive Maintenance Plan. (Not followed up on)
Certain components of the payments to bus contractors
could not be supported and included costs that should not
Finding 10 Not repeated
have been reimbursed, resulting in higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
HCPS did not independently verify manifest data entered
into the transportation payments system and did not
Finding 11 Not repeated
maintain support for payments made prior to fiscal year
2020.
HCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of
health care claims, insurance premiums and administrative
Finding 12 Not repeated
fees paid to the third-party administrator, and the
eligibility of enrolled dependents.
3 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
has been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Harford County Public Schools (HCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Harford County, the State, and the federal government. According
to HCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled
approximately $841.2 million in fiscal year 2025, including approximately $395.4
million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited HCPS’ financial statements and the objectives of our
audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to provide
audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via electronic
funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor's procedural review
and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2025, school
activity collections totaled approximately $4.6 million and the June 30, 2025 fund
balance was $2.7 million. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of
this activity, we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the firm to provide audit coverage in this area
including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and safeguarding
of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Federal Funds
Background
HCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to HCPS' Single Audit, fiscal year
2025 expenditures totaled $40.5 million, not including federally funded fee-for-
service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $26.1 million in fiscal year 2020 to $40.5 million in
fiscal year 2025 (55 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
Specifically, according to HCPS' records, as of June 30, 2025, HCPS was
awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $100.7 million to be
distributed over fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental
Appropriations Act, and the American Rescue Plan. According to HCPS records,
expenditures from March 2020 to August 2025 related to these COVID-19 grants
totaled $100.4 million. HCPS advised us that the remaining amount of the
awarded grant funds would not be expended.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the Single Audit of HCPS'
federal grants and the objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to
expressing an opinion on HCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control structure’s
impact on compliance and audited the required Schedule of Expenditures of
Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant expenditures) for
fiscal years 2020 through 2025. Our review of the Single Audits did not identify
any issues that warranted inclusion in this report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
HCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to HCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s (MSDE) Interagency Medicaid
Monitoring Team issued a report on February 28, 2025 of the results of its review
of 70 student case files for 92 criteria. The report did not specifically address the
propriety of Medicaid billing but overall concluded that HCPS was generally
14

--- Page 17 ---
compliant with most criteria. For example, HCPS was 100 percent compliant
with 78 criteria and from 80 to 99 percent compliant with 10 criteria.
According to audited financial statements, fiscal year 2025 state and federal
reimbursements for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $6.3
million, which was a decrease of approximately $1.5 million from the previous
fiscal year. Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to
our audit objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized
services.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the Single Audits for the work in the federal
fund area, including policies, procedures and controls with respect to federal
grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and HCPS’ records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $270.7 million during fiscal year 2025. HCPS uses a
financial management system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are
created in the system by departments and are subject to online departmental
approvals. Purchase orders are prepared in the system by the Procurement
department based on approved requisitions. The Procurement department and
Planning & Construction department handle the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by a requestor directly into the financial management
system before being forwarded to the requestor’s supervisor and the appropriate
school or department for approval, as necessary. Once approved, the Procurement
department will initiate the purchase order to be generated by the financial
management system and sent to the vendor for fulfillment. The system matches
the invoice to the related purchase order then prints the vendor checks, which are
manually reviewed by the Accounts Payable department, and then posts the
payment to the financial records.
Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that procurements equal to or exceeding $100,000 (prior to October 1,
2023 the amount was $50,000) be competitively bid, and HCPS’ Procurement
Manual requires that procurements of contracts and agreements valued at
15

--- Page 18 ---
$100,000 or more be approved by the Harford County Board of Education
(Board) and the Superintendent.
Finding 1
HCPS did not publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
(eMMA) as required by State procurement law.
Analysis
HCPS did not publish contract awards on eMMA4 as required by State
procurement law. State law requires the solicitation and award of contracts of
$100,0005 or more procured by public schools after July 1, 2022 to be published
on eMMA. Our test of 12 contracts6 procured during fiscal years 2023 through
2026 totaling $104.6 million (each over $100,000) disclosed that HCPS did not
publish awards for any of the 12 contracts on eMMA, as required. Rather, HCPS’
practice was to post a link on eMMA to the awards listed on their website. We
were advised by management from the Department of General Services – Office
of State Procurement management that this was not sufficient. Publishing awards
on eMMA provides transparency over State procurements, including information
about winning bidders and the amount of the related awards.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that HCPS publish contract awards on eMMA as required,
including those noted above.
Finding 2
HCPS did not execute formal written contracts and did not obtain approval
from the Board for certain special education services.
Analysis
HCPS did not execute formal written contracts or obtain approval from the Board
for certain special education services. HCPS provides special education services
in accordance with the individualized education program developed for each
student. According to HCPS’ records, it paid two Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE) certified non-public schools approximately $50.5 million for
special education services between July 1, 2020 and May 29, 2026.
4 eMMA is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
5 Between July 1, 2022 and September 30, 2023, the threshold for posting awards was $50,000.
6 Test items were selected based on materiality.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Our review disclosed that HCPS did not obtain Board approval for the services
from these entities as required by its Procurement Manual for contracts (including
special education services) over $100,000 and did not have contracts with the
non-public schools. Although not specifically required by its Manual, written
contracts set forth all financial terms and conditions, define the duties and
responsibilities of the parties, protect each party in the event of default, and
provide other critical terms for items such as resolution of disputes, termination
for convenience, and retention of records.
HCPS management advised us that it did not follow the Manual because MSDE
certified the non-public schools that provided special education services and
approved the rates of those services. However, there was no exemption for these
services in HCPS’ Manual, which as noted above does require Board approval.
Furthermore, HCPS did not have the safeguards and controls provided by a
contract.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that HCPS
a. modify its Procurement Manual to require formal written contracts for
service contracts, including special education services; and
b. comply with its Manual by obtaining Board approval for special
education services.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the HCPS budget.
According to HCPS’ records, fiscal year 2025 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $615.6 million, representing 69 percent of total
expenditures. According to MSDE reports, during the 2024-2025 school year,
HCPS had 5,457 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 4,017
instructional and 1,440 non-instructional positions.
HCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
17

--- Page 20 ---
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of HCPS’ internal control over the human resources and payroll areas of
operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to HCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, and equipment) totaled
approximately $71.9 million as of June 30, 2025. HCPS maintains centralized
automated records for all equipment including assets with a cost of $5,000 or
more that are capitalized for financial statement purposes. Control and
recordkeeping of non-capitalized assets having a value of less than $5,000 is
delegated to individual departments or schools. Accordingly, certain information
technology items (desktops, laptops, tablets) are recorded on separate inventory
records maintained by the school where the items are located. HCPS has
established written equipment policies.
Finding 3
HCPS’ equipment policies were not comprehensive, detail records were
incomplete, and physical inventories were not conducted.
Analysis
HCPS’ equipment policies did not establish system-wide standards for controlling
capital and sensitive equipment. For example, there were no requirements for
tagging equipment, performing physical inventories, and investigating lost and
stolen items. Additionally, HCPS policies did not define or require recording of
non-capitalized sensitive equipment items that would be prone to theft, such as
technology equipment (for example, cameras and laptops). The Government
Finance Officers Association recommends that an entity establish controls over
non-capitalized equipment that is marketable and susceptible to theft.
Absent established system-wide standards, HCPS maintained informal,
incomplete records of non-capitalized assets, which included certain types of
sensitive items (such as desktops, laptops, and tablets) while excluding others
(such as digital cameras or projectors). Furthermore, since it was not required,
these records did not include the cost of the sensitive items or the purchase date.
As of May 2026, HCPS’ records listed approximately 53,000 non-capitalized
devices with product name, model, serial number, and location information.
18

--- Page 21 ---
HCPS also did not perform periodic physical inventories of either capital or
sensitive non-capitalized equipment to account for items recorded, and identify
and investigate missing items. Our test of 10 sensitive equipment items recorded
in HCPS records disclosed that all items existed and were located.7
Similar conditions were commented upon in our three preceding audit reports
dating back to May 2008. HCPS’ response to our prior report indicated that it
would establish inventory policies and procedures to address accountability and
controls over sensitive items. HCPS also indicated that the asset management
systems used to track and account for assets does not track cost information and
that the enterprise resource planning system does not contain cost information.
Although HCPS established policies and procedures over certain information
technology equipment, as noted above the policies and procedures did not address
tagging equipment, maintaining complete records of sensitive non-capitalized
assets, performing physical inventories, and investigating lost and stolen items.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that HCPS
a. establish policies and procedures to ensure that accountability and
control is maintained over its equipment inventory (recording and
conducting periodic inventories), including certain sensitive non-
capitalized items (repeat);
b. ensure that all sensitive equipment items, deemed subject to theft, are
recorded in the detail records (repeat); and
c. conduct periodic physical inventories of equipment items, compare the
results to the detail records, and investigate missing items (repeat).
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 4 and
5 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are
subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the
following findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with
HCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this report copy.
7 Test items were selected from a May 2026 inventory listing for all three device management
systems utilized by HCPS.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
HCPS employs a staff of 441 employees to maintain its 52 schools and its other
administrative and support offices. According to HCPS’ fiscal year 2027 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to HCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated to cost
$236.9 million.
HCPS Capital Projects Were Competitively Solicited and Approved by the
Board and Related Expenditures Were Generally Properly Supported
Our review of 6 construction-related procurements (selected based on materiality)
awarded during fiscal years 2023 and 2024 totaling $91.6 million, disclosed that
the related services were competitively procured. In addition, our test of 6
invoices totaling $5.6 million for these contracts disclosed that invoices were
properly supported, reviewed and approved, and the amounts invoiced were in
accordance with contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
HCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. Specifically, HCPS has written policies that encourage
both students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use, and
monitors building energy on a centralized basis. HCPS also provides scheduled
maintenance of its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing
emergency repairs. In addition, HCPS participates in a Baltimore regional
cooperative and an Eastern Shore consortium to purchase energy at the best
possible terms. Finally, HCPS also utilizes a vendor energy management
program to monitor and control heating, air conditioning, and lighting usage and
HCPS reviews utility billings to monitor related costs. According to documents
provided by HCPS from its energy management vendor (which we did not audit),
HCPS saved approximately $7.5 million through energy cost avoidance from
calendar years 2021 to 2025.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of HCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for facilities
construction, renovation and maintenance. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by MSDE, HCPS had approximately 33,481
students eligible to receive student transportation services during fiscal year 2025.
These students were transported using 345 contractor-owned buses and 101
system-owned buses. HCPS reported that 7.4 million route miles were traveled to
transport students for the 2024-2025 school year. According to HCPS’ records,
fiscal year 2025 transportation costs totaled approximately $45.1 million, of
which $33.1 million (approximately 73 percent) were payments for contracted bus
services for various costs.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions in the transportation services
area.
Food Services
Background
According to HCPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $23.7 million in fiscal year 2025, and were primarily funded
with federal and State funds totaling $15.4 million and food sales totaling $7.5
million. The federal funds are received from the United States Department of
Agriculture based on an established rate per meals served. HCPS is allowed to
retain federal funds it receives in excess of its annual food service operating costs
to be used to offset certain future food service operating costs. According to
HCPS’ audited financial statements, the balance in HCPS’ Food Services Fund
totaled approximately $10.7 million as of June 30, 2025.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to Food Services financial area of operations.
21

--- Page 24 ---
School Board Oversight
Background
The Board is composed of six elected voting members, three appointed voting
members, the county superintendent of schools, who is an ex officio non-voting
member, and one voting student member. The Board contracted with a certified
public accounting firm to conduct independent audits of the HCPS financial
statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight of various areas of
HCPS operations and governance, the Board established several committees, such
as an Ethics Panel and a number of citizen advisory groups, which meet with the
Board periodically and serve as channels for public concerns and information.
HCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both
Board members and HCPS employees and include provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (such as supervisors, directors, and school principals) by April 30th
of each year.
In accordance with the policy, HCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and HCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2023 and 2024 disclosed that forms were generally submitted as
required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
HCPS is a member of the Harford County Public Entities Health Care Consortium
for employee and retiree health care. The Consortium members are self-insured
for healthcare costs up to a designated stop-loss amount ($400,000 per HCPS
participant per plan year). The Consortium contracts with a third-party
22

--- Page 25 ---
administrator (TPA) for health care claims processing services for employee
medical (including prescription costs), dental and vision, and for stop-loss
insurance coverage. The TPA bills HCPS monthly subscription charges based on
the number of participants and their medical coverage. Medical providers submit
claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of HCPS. HCPS pays its TPA an
administrative fee for these services.
As of May 27, 2026, HCPS provided health insurance benefits to 16,716 enrolled
employees, dependents, and retirees. According to the TPA’s records for the plan
year ended June 30, 2025, HCPS health care expenditures totaled approximately
$104 million, including administrative fees totaling $2.5 million, and stop-loss
insurance coverage totaling approximately $2.9 million.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions in the management of other
risks area.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Harford County Public Schools
(HCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which generally
requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school systems to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management practices. This
performance audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the HCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the HCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of HCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas included revenue
and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements, human resources and
payroll, equipment control, information technology security and control, facilities,
transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the management of other
risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on HCPS dated March 24, 2021
was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for
each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the HCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
24

--- Page 27 ---
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by HCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
HCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of HCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2023 to December 31, 2025.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
HCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data – including financial and operational – compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the HCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
HCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
25

--- Page 28 ---
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to HCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
HCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to HCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from January 2026 to June 2026. HCPS’ response to
our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report.
Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity
findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise HCPS regarding the results of our review of its response.
26

--- Page 29 ---
BUSINESS SERVICES
APPENDIX
Deborah L. Judd, CPA, Chief Financial Officer
Deborah.Judd@hcps.org
August 24, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Please accept the attached Agency Response Form as the result of the Legislative Audit of Harford
County Public Schools. We appreciate the collaboration during the audit and the opportunity to
provide responses to your findings.
Please contact us with any questions.
Sincerely,
Deborah L. Judd
Chief Financial Officer

--- Page 30 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
HCPS did not publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
(eMMA) as required by State procurement law.
We recommend that HCPS publish contract awards on eMMA as required,
including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Clarification: HCPS did post a link to the HCPS website to access the
additional comments as award which simply does not align with the direct post to the website.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2027
Please provide details of HCPS reviewed the vendors for the 12 awards reviewed. Since all were
corrective action or registered on eMMA, those contracts will be posted. Any new contracts
explain disagreement. awarded on or after 7/1/26 will be published to eMMA as well.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 31 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
HCPS did not execute formal written contracts and did not obtain approval
from the Board for certain special education services.
We recommend that HCPS
a. modify its Procurement Manual to require formal written contracts for
service contracts, including special education services; and
b. comply with its Manual by obtaining Board approval for special
education services.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually accurate
Please provide This change has been actively in process since April 2026.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2027
Please provide details of HCPS will revise the Procurement Manual to include language stating
corrective action or
that any contract with a value exceeding $50,000 must be executed
explain disagreement.
through a written contract.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2027
Please provide details of HCPS is working to finalize contracts with our 31 non-public or private
corrective action or
separate day school partners who provide Special Education services to
explain disagreement.
HCPS students placed in more restrictive settings. After finalized, they
will be taken to the Board of Education for approval.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 32 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Equipment Control and Accountability
Finding 3
HCPS’ equipment policies were not comprehensive, detail records were
incomplete, and physical inventories were not conducted.
We recommend that HCPS
a. establish policies and procedures to ensure that accountability and
control is maintained over its equipment inventory (recording and
conducting periodic inventories), including certain sensitive non-
capitalized items (repeat);
b. ensure that all sensitive equipment items, deemed subject to theft, are
recorded in the detail records (repeat); and
c. conduct periodic physical inventories of equipment items, compare the
results to the detail records, and investigate missing items (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide HCPS provided information regarding practices of tracking non-
additional comments as capitalizable items. An updated policy will be established.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2027
Please provide details of HCPS will implement a policy and/or procedure to address these items.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2027
Please provide details of The procedure will address sensitive inventory items.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2027
Please provide details of The procedure will address acceptable periodic physical inventory
corrective action or processes.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 33 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 4 and 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with HCPS’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, HCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 34 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Mindy R. Garrett
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Senior Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Stephanie A. Boateng
Tari J. Covington
Ali A. Dayya
Ryan S. Krogen, CFE, CIA
Amy C. Roberts
Garrett A. White
Staff Auditors
Thelma H. Caplan
Evan C. Joneckis
Annamarie M. Plass
Information Systems Staff Auditors