Title: Maryland Transportation Authority
Date: 2026-08-27
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6a96e5839e660f28196a9c7a
Extracted: 2026-09-07T11:18:04.278848
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Transportation Authority
August 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 27, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Transportation
Authority (MDTA) for the period beginning March 5, 2020 and ending May 31,
2025. Due to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge on March 26, 2024, we
delayed the start of our audit from its planned due date in March 2024 to April
2025. MDTA is responsible for the supervision, financing, construction,
operation, maintenance, and repair of the State’s toll facilities.
Our audit disclosed that MDTA did not take available actions to collect unpaid
tolls and penalties incurred by out-of-state vehicles, which totaled $818.1 million
as of January 2026. According to MDTA records, approximately $668.7 million
(82 percent) was outstanding for more than one year, including $386.3 million
that was outstanding more than three years. For example, MDTA did not execute
reciprocity agreements with other states as allowed by State law which could
include provisions for these states to suspend the out-of-state motorists’ vehicle
registration if the tolls are not paid.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were

--- Page 4 ---
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
The Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) response to this audit, on
behalf of MDTA, is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent with State
law, we have redacted the elements of MDOT’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit finding. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the
response and, while MDOT generally agrees with the recommendations in this
report, we identified certain instances in which statements in the response
disagree or appear to be inconsistent with a report finding and recommendation.
In each instance we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within
MDOT’s response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
MDOT.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDTA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Financial Statement Audits 5
Special Review - Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer 5
Service Processes
Francis Scott Key Bridge Collapse 5
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Out-of-State Toll Collections
Finding 1 – The Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) did not 8
take available efforts to collect unpaid tolls and penalties incurred by
out-of-state vehicles, which totaled $818.1 million as of January 2026.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 9
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Title 4 of the Transportation Article, Annotated Code of Maryland, establishes the
Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) as an agency of the State, to act on
behalf of the Maryland Department of Transportation with regard to the
supervision, financing, construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of the
State’s toll facilities. The governing board of MDTA consists of eight members
who are appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Secretary of Transportation serves as the Chairman.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2025, MDTA’s expenditures totaled
approximately $1.1 billion (see Figure 1), including $524.6 million for capital
programs to construct, maintain and repair its facilities. According to its audited
financial statements, MDTA’s operating revenues totaled $887.5 million
(including $732.2 million in toll revenue) during fiscal year 2025. During the
period June 30, 2021 through June 30, 2025, MDTA had vacancy rates that
ranged from 10 percent to 20 percent.
Figure 1
MDTA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 1,523
Vacant 174
Total 1,697
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $ 243,056,871
Technical and Special Fees 107,500
Operating Expenses 885,027,787
Total $1,128,192,158
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
Non-Budgeted Fund $1,128,192,158
Total $1,128,192,158
Source: State financial and personnel records
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Statement Audits
MDTA engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025.
In the related audit reports, the firm stated that MDTA’s financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial position of the
business type activities of the MDTA and its changes in financial position and
cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.
Special Review - Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and
Customer Service Processes
On March 22, 2023, we issued a report on our Special Review - Data Analysis of
Electronic Tolling and Customer Services Processes. The report identified
approximately $435,000 in potentially improper toll charges to 10,474 Thomas J.
Hatem Memorial Bridge discount plan customers and approximately $645,000
relating to 82,847 customers that were potentially charged more than once for a
single trip through a toll facility.
We reviewed system controls implemented in response to this report and
performed various tests of those controls. Our audit did not identify any
conditions that warranted inclusion in this report. In addition, our audit disclosed
that between September 2023 and April 2024 MDTA issued credits to 12,932
Thomas J. Hatem Bridge discount plan customers totaling $637,000 and $695,000
for duplicate tolls charged to customers.
Francis Scott Key Bridge Collapse
On March 26, 2024, a container ship collided with the Francis Scott Key Bridge,
resulting in the bridge’s collapse. In April 2024, MDTA awarded a $50.3 million
emergency contract for the removal, disposal, and cleanup of debris from the
collapsed portion of the bridge. In March 2024, prior to awarding a design-build
contractor, MDTA made a preliminary estimate to replace the bridge between
$1.7 billion to $1.9 billion with a completion date in 2028. MDTA advised us
that this estimate was made for the purposes of securing federal funding for the
new bridge.
In August 2024, MDTA approved the award of a design-build contract for $73
million. Between January and July 2025, MDTA awarded three work
authorizations totaling approximately $98 million on the contract for field and
subsurface studies, purchasing materials, and conducting tests to ensure that the
5

--- Page 8 ---
design is structurally feasible. Between July and November 2025, MDTA
awarded five work authorizations totaling approximately $355.3 million for the
demolition of the remaining bridge, certain materials (such as, platforms for
bridge construction to support cranes and drilling machines), and the installation
of these materials.
In November 2025, design and preliminary engineering activities were
approximately 70 percent complete, and MDTA announced that the total
estimated cost to replace the bridge had increased to between $4.3 billion to $5.2
billion and the estimated completion date was extended an additional two years to
calendar year 2030. MDTA management advised that the increase and extended
timeline was primarily due to increases in the materials cost, a change in the
width and height of the new bridge, and the addition of a robust pier protection
system to help reduce the likelihood of a similar incident. In addition, the revised
estimate included $923.5 million in contingency costs which were not included in
the original estimate.
In January 2026, MDTA reported to the Maryland General Assembly’s Senate
Budget and Taxation Committee and the House Appropriations Committee that it
had expended approximately $238 million on the project as of November 2025.
This amount included the cost to remove the debris of the bridge collapse,
payments for the design-build contractor, and other related costs (such as
construction management and inspection services).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 13, 2021. See Figure 2 for the
results of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MDTA actions did not determine the impact of
electronic toll collection system issues on its customers
Finding 1 Not repeated
and identify and correct certain related customer
overbillings.
Finding 2 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted1
1 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
has been redacted for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Out-of-State Toll Collections
Finding 1
The Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) did not take available
actions to collect unpaid tolls and penalties incurred by out-of-state vehicles,
which totaled $818.1 million as of January 2026.
Analysis
MDTA did not take available actions to collect unpaid tolls and penalties incurred
by out-of-state vehicles. As of January 2026, unpaid tolls and penalties incurred
by out-of-state vehicles totaled $818.1 million (see Figure 3). According to
MDTA records, approximately $668.7 million (82 percent) was outstanding for
more than year, including
$386.3 million that was
Figure 3
outstanding more than three
Out-of-State Vehicle Tolls and Penalties
years. Our review disclosed
Unpaid as of January 2026
that although MDTA sent the
registered owner of the out-of- (amounts in millions)
state vehicle a notice of the toll
State Tolls Penalties Total
and assessed penalties when the
Virginia $ 51.9 $182.8 $234.7
tolls were unpaid,2 it did not
Pennsylvania 26.1 71.4 97.5
take available action to collect
New Jersey 26.5 54.2 80.7
the amounts due.
Florida 24.8 38.2 63.0
North Carolina 19.1 39.5 58.6
Specifically, as of February
Other States 82.5 201.1 283.6
2026, MDTA did not execute
Total $230.9 $587.2 $818.1
reciprocity agreements with
other states as allowed by State
So urce: MDTA records
law which could include
provisions for these states to suspend the out-of-state motorists’ vehicle
registration if the tolls are not paid. In addition, MDTA did not contract with a
third-party collection agency to help collect the unpaid tolls and civil penalties or
request approval from the Secretary of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) to refer these accounts to the Central Collection Unit (CCU).
State law allows MDTA to refer out-of-state motorists to CCU only if it obtains
approval from the Secretary of DBM.
2 A $25 penalty is assessed for each video toll transaction not paid by the specified due date,
which is generally 45 days after the date of the invoice.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Concerns with unpaid out-of-state tolls and penalties were raised in the April
2024 Joint Chairmen’s report. In January 2025, MDTA responded that it was
optimistic about the possibility of entering into its first reciprocity agreement,
which could include provisions to suspend the out-of-state motorists’ vehicle
registration if the tolls were not paid. As of July 2026, MDTA was still working
to finalize that agreement. In addition, MDTA indicated it was developing a
request for proposal to hire a third-party collection agency. However, as of
February 2026, MDTA had not entered into agreements with any other states and
had not drafted the request for proposal.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDTA take available actions to help enforce collection
of unpaid tolls and penalties due from out-of-state motorists, including
a. executing reciprocity agreements with other states as allowed by State
law,
b. contracting with a third-party collection agency, and
c. requesting approval from DBM to refer unpaid tolls to CCU.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 2 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDOT’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Transportation
Authority (MDTA) for the period beginning March 5, 2020 and ending May 31,
2025. Due to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge on March 26, 2024, we
delayed the start of our audit from its planned due date in March 2024 to April
2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDTA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements for capital
projects and operating expenditures, equipment, corporate purchasing card,
electronic tolling activities, certain cash receipts and payroll activities, and
information systems security and control. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided by
the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) – The Secretary’s Office to
MDTA. These payroll support services are included within the scope of our audit
of MDOT. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls
over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of MDTA’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because MDTA engages an independent accounting firm to annually
audit such programs.
MDTA engages an independent accounting firm to audit its annual financial
statements. In the related audit reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021,
2022, 2023, 2024 and 2025 the firm stated that MDTA’s financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial position of the
business-type activities of the MDTA as of June 30, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024 and
2025 and the respective changes in financial position and cash flows thereof for
10

--- Page 13 ---
the years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted
in the United States of America. We relied on the work of the independent
accounting firm to provide audit coverage pertaining to bank and investment
accounts, debt issuances and related debt covenants. Our audit procedures in
those areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for
that reliance.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on MDTA’s procedures and
controls in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other
auditing procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during
our audit period of March 5, 2020 to May 31, 2025, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDTA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MDTA’s general ledger and purchasing and
disbursement systems for the purpose of testing purchases and disbursements and
extracted data from MDTA’s tolling customer service contractor for the purpose
of testing collection efforts for electronic tolls. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data was used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The
11

--- Page 14 ---
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
MDTA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDTA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDTA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDTA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
12

--- Page 15 ---
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to MDTA and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from MDOT, on behalf of MDTA, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government 12
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
Out-of-State Toll Collections
Finding 1
The Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) did not take available
actions to collect unpaid tolls and penalties incurred by out-of-state vehicles,
which totaled $818.1 million as of January 2026.
We recommend that MDTA take available actions to help enforce collection
of unpaid tolls and penalties due from out-of-state motorists, including
a. executing reciprocity agreements with other states as allowed by State
law,
b. contracting with a third-party collection agency, and
c. requesting approval from DBM to refer unpaid tolls to CCU.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, MDTA transitioned all tolling
additional comments as at its facilities from cash payments to all-electronic tolling to automate
deemed necessary. and streamline toll payments across the state. For customers that do not
have an E-ZPass, MDTA issues a Notice of Toll Due to the address
associated with the vehicle owner’s license plate. Maryland has several
mechanisms to enforce unpaid tolls and penalties for in-state vehicles,
including the ability to intercept state tax refunds from violators. This
allowed MDTA to collect approximately $119.3 million in outstanding
tolls and penalties from Maryland residents since FY 2023. However, a
similar function does not exist for nonresident motorists, making
collection avenues significantly more complex. The MDTA has been
transparent in its acknowledgment of the challenges associated with
collecting video tolls in its Joint Chairmen’s Report responses to the
Maryland General Assembly and its annual Revenue Assurance
presentation to the MDTA Board in recent years.
The MDTA acknowledges the importance of implementing a multi-
prong approach to collecting unpaid tolls from nonresident drivers, in
accordance with best practice recommendations presented by OLA.
This includes but is not limited to entering into toll enforcement
reciprocity agreements with other jurisdictions, leveraging national
electronic toll interoperability networks, and contracting with third party
collection agencies to pursue unpaid debt. However, it is important to
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
note that these actions require significant time to implement. Executing
reciprocity agreements, for example, depends on MDTA’s counterparts
in other states to navigate laws and regulations associated with their
respective transportation systems, creating long and unpredictable
timelines for implementation.
MDTA is committed to ensuring the below corrective actions are
fulfilled in accordance with best practices, and implementing systems
that will ensure the agency maximizes all opportunities to capture
available revenues while holding debtors accountable to paying their
dues to the State of Maryland.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3Q 2027 for
Pennsylvania
Please provide details of Maryland law (Transportation Article § 21-1415) authorizes the
corrective action or Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) to create agreements with
explain disagreement. other jurisdictions for reciprocal toll violation enforcement. The agency
recognizes the importance of pursuing toll enforcement reciprocity to
collect unpaid tolls from out-of-state motorists. The implementation of
reciprocal toll enforcement agreements is one of multiple strategies
currently underway to aid in the collection of out-of-state toll debt.
While reciprocity agreements are valuable tools to encourage payment
compliance, the development and implementation of reciprocal toll
enforcement agreements are challenging for the State of Maryland, as
well as other tolling agencies nationally. As noted in the MDTA’s 2024
and 2025 Joint Chairmen’s Report responses to the Maryland General
Assembly, several of the primary obstacles, which complicate the
development and implementation of reciprocal toll enforcement
agreements, include (1) the notable differences in motor vehicle toll
enforcement actions and financial penalties for unpaid tolls among
states; (2) the need for the statutes, regulations, policies, operational
processes, and technical capabilities of the agencies governing toll
collection (tolling and motor vehicle) within each jurisdiction to be
evaluated, and, where necessary, aligned before reaching a final
agreement; and (3) reciprocal toll enforcement agreements are executed
on a peer agency-to-peer agency basis rather than through direct state-to-
state agreements.
Currently, the State of Maryland is working diligently toward
establishing its inaugural reciprocal toll enforcement agreement with the
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission (PTC). The MDTA and the Motor
Vehicle Administration (MVA) have jointly initiated discussions with
the PTC and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation’s Motor
Vehicle Administration (PennDOT) regarding the establishment of a
reciprocal toll enforcement agreement. The MDTA and the PTC have
mutually agreed that it would be most beneficial to leverage the toll
enforcement reciprocity agreement framework that is currently being
negotiated between Pennsylvania and New York. The proposed
agreement will likely entail flagging and/or suspending a motorist’s
vehicle registration when either a Pennsylvania or Maryland resident
owes qualifying unpaid tolls in the reciprocal jurisdiction. Next steps
include, but are not limited to, verifying statutory alignment, drafting
program requirements (e.g., governance structure, definition and
agreement on terminology, etc.); legal review (draft agreement, statutes,
etc.); and agreement finalization and execution between four agencies
(MDTA, MVA, PTC, and PennDOT). Prior to going live with toll
reciprocity, information technology system workflow testing, software
updates, and staff training will be conducted. The parties have
established target milestones for agreement execution and operational
go-live of January 2027 and Fall 2027, respectively.
PTC is deemed the best fit for Maryland’s first reciprocal toll
enforcement agreement because (1) PTC’s toll enforcement actions and
penalties for non-compliant motorists are operationally similar to those
used by the MDTA; (2) PTC’s level of customer service is
commensurate with the State of Maryland’s customer service objectives,
including an adequate level of investment in automation and the
corresponding assurance that motor vehicle registration flags will be
released promptly when customers satisfy their outstanding toll
obligations; and (3) the potential to achieve significant results going
forward given that Pennsylvania residents owe the second highest
amount of unpaid tolls and civil penalties.
Additionally, it should be noted that the toll enforcement reciprocity
agreement with Pennsylvania will be the MDTA’s pilot agreement. The
MDTA is engaged in discussions with Virginia and the New York
Thruway about the feasibility of entering into future agreements with a
timeline to be determined in the future.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
Lastly, the MDTA is also leveraging the national electronic toll
interoperability network to increase the collection of toll revenue from
out-of-state motorists using MDTA toll facilities. As part of this effort,
MDTA is in the process of joining the Northern Hub (estimated to occur
in the fourth quarter of calendar 2026), which will establish
interoperability with the Central U.S. Interoperability Partnership
(CUSIOP) Hub. This expansion will enable MDTA to electronically
process toll transactions for motorists using interoperable transponders
issued in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Colorado by charging
customers' prepaid electronic toll accounts at the time of travel. Given
that Texas and Florida are high volume outstanding debt states, many
transactions that would otherwise become post-trip video tolls, requiring
billing and collection efforts, will instead be collected electronically at
the point of tolling. The CUSIOP Hub connection, which is being
coordinated by the E-ZPass Interagency Group (IAG), will allow MDTA
to immediately focus near-term on these states by end of calendar year
2026.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3Q 2027
Please provide details of MDTA is actively developing a Request for Proposals (RFP) to initiate
corrective action or out-of-state collections services for the first time. MDTA began this
explain disagreement. effort by hosting Request for Information meetings with nine firms that
operate within the toll collections services market. These discussions
were used to better inform the development of the RFP structure, scope,
and performance expectations typical in the tolling industry. In parallel,
staff gathered information from other state transportation and tolling
agencies regarding lessons learned and industry best practices. To date,
RFP specifications have been developed to facilitate high industry
response.
Recommendation 1c Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of The MDTA acknowledges the important role that the Department of
corrective action or Budget and Management’s (DBM) Central Collection Unit (CCU) has in
explain disagreement. collecting unpaid debt from Maryland residents. Arguably, the most
significant tool that CCU has is its State Tax Refund Intercept Program.
The program enables CCU to seize a Maryland resident’s expected tax
refund to pay off past-due debt to the State of Maryland (including toll
debt). While this program has aided the MDTA in collecting
approximately $119.3 million in outstanding tolls and penalties from
Maryland residents since FY 2023, a similar program does not exist for
nonresident motorists. Consequently, it has been the MDTA’s
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
experience that CCU’s ability to collect unpaid tolls from nonresident
motorists is limited.
The MDTA and DBM are aligned in the belief that referring outstanding
toll debt for out-of-state motorists to CCU is not in the best interest of
either agency at this time. Currently, CCU is limited in the tools
available to pursue collection from out-of-state motorists. Furthermore,
based on historical collection activity, CCU is concerned that the costs
required to pursue the debts from out-of-state motorists could exceed the
revenue collected and the additional burden on resources to handle this
group of debtors could have a negative effect on collection activities on
other State debt that CCU is currently pursuing. Lastly, the referral of
out-of-state debt to CCU could restrict the MDTA’s other collection
efforts, such as contracting with an outside collection agency.
Consequently, outside of expanding national interoperability through the
E-ZPass® Group and other hubs, the MDTA and DBM believe that the
MDTA should pursue entering into toll enforcement reciprocity
agreements and contracting with one or more third party collection
agencies. These enhanced collection tools currently constitute the best
mechanisms for collecting unpaid toll debt from out-of-state motorists.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MDOT’s response indicates that it disagrees
with Recommendation 1c, it also indicates that MDTA will continue to pursue
other available collection actions as recommended. As noted in our Analysis,
MDTA did not request approval from the Secretary of DBM to refer these
accounts to CCU during our audit as allowed by State law. However, MDOT’s
response states that MDTA and DBM are now aligned in the belief that referring
outstanding toll debt for out-of-state motorists to CCU is not in the best interest of
either agency at this time.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 2 related
to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article,
Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject
to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the
State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following
finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDOT’s
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, MDOT’s responses
indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Thomas J. Kraemer
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Ryan S. Krogen, CIA, CFE
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditors