Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Washington County
Date: 2026-08-31
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6a9751849e660f28196b39e6
Extracted: 2026-09-07T11:18:11.956924
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Washington County, Maryland
August 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 31, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Washington County, Maryland for the period beginning March 1, 2022
and ending March 5, 2026. The Office performs various functions for the public,
including maintaining various legal records, recording certain real estate
documents, collecting related fees and taxes, and issuing certain licenses.
Our audit disclosed that the Office did not have adequate procedures to ensure
that certain criminal case dispositions were accurately recorded. According to the
Judiciary’s records, 836 criminal cases were closed during fiscal year 2025.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Office, is included as an
appendix to this report. We have reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Washington County and its incorporated municipalities, and subsequently
distributes the funds to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State's accounting records, the Office's fiscal year 2025 revenues
totaled $25,240,218. These revenues were distributed in the following manner:
 $16,080,784 was distributed to Washington County and its incorporated cities
and towns, and
 $9,159,434 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The majority of the Office’s fiscal year 2025 expenditures, which totaled
$3,584,896, were salaries and wages that were paid primarily from a general fund
appropriation.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds that, according to its
records, had balances totaling $1,143,879 as of February 28, 2026.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Washington County
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 29
Vacant 2
Total 31
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $3,342,582
Operating Expenses 242,314
Total $3,584,896
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $2,755,437
Special Fund 761,281
Reimbursable Fund 68,178
Total $3,584,896
Source: State financial and personnel records
Findings and Recommendations
Criminal Court Case Dispositions
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system.
Analysis
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system. The courtroom clerk manually recorded
the case disposition on various documents that are used to update the Maryland
Electronic Courts (MDEC) system. According to the Judiciary’s records, there
were approximately 836 criminal cases closed during fiscal year 2025.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our review disclosed that the supervisory personnel did not use independent
source documentation, such as courtroom recordings, to ensure case dispositions
were accurately recorded in MDEC except for cases that included a judgement for
probation.1 Instead, supervisory personnel relied on the initial record manually
prepared by the courtroom clerk to ensure that information was accurately
recorded in MDEC. This review would not identify potential discrepancies from
the actual court disposition to those recorded by the courtroom clerk on the
manual form which would be identified by reviewing the courtroom recording.
Our test of 18 criminal court cases2 (which included 4 cases that did not include
probation) disclosed that the disposition of each case was accurately recorded in
MDEC.
In February 2026, shortly before the start of our fieldwork, the Judiciary issued
guidance to all Clerk's Offices recommending a regular independent review of at
least ten percent of criminal and civil cases using courtroom recordings. Since the
aforementioned information is critical for public safety, it is incumbent on the
Office to ensure the information is accurate and properly communicated, as
required.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office ensure court dispositions are verified by
supervisory personnel, at least on a test basis, to independent source
documents, such as courtroom recordings.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Washington County, Maryland for the period beginning March 1, 2022
and ending March 5, 2026. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
1 The Office could not readily identify how many of the aforementioned 836 cases did not include
probation due to MDEC reporting limitations.
2 Case records were selected from fiscal year 2024 and 2025 based on the case disposition,
complexity of the case record, severity of the charges, and date of the disposition.
5

--- Page 8 ---
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), certain payroll activities, bank accounts, and court
records.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as human resources and payroll activities, invoice processing, and maintenance of
budgetary accounting records) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Judiciary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 1, 2022 to March 5, 2026, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit.
6

--- Page 9 ---
We also extracted data from the Office’s court record systems for the purposes of
testing certain areas, such as court activities. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations.
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 11 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Washington County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Criminal Court Case Dispositions
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately recorded on the
automated court system.
We recommend that the Office ensure court dispositions are verified by supervisory personnel, at least
on a test basis, to independent source documents, such as courtroom recordings.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The Washington County Circuit Clerk’s Office has had a supervisory review process
additional in place that includes a 100% review of all criminal cases that have had a hearing.
comments as While this review includes hearing sheets and probation orders, it has not included
deemed necessary. the verification of criminal disposition by reviewing court audio recordings, at least
on a test basis
For FY25 there were 698 new criminal cases filed of which all were reviewed for
accuracy by the Criminal Supervisor. Of those cases, 243 cases, or 34.81%, had a
probation order docketed. Probation orders are an independent source document that
has been reviewed and signed by a judge.
The Clerk of the Circuit Court for Washington County recognizes that although the
recommendation to utilize “…on a test basis…independent source documents, such
as courtroom recordings” is a valid suggestion, it was, however, never a published
recommendation of any past audit of the Office of Legislative Audits, nor a
requirement of our 2025 Internal Audit.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/06/2026
Please provide The Clerk’s Office, with the recent knowledge of this new audit requirement, has
details of corrective obtained a CourtSmart license with assistance from the Washington County Circuit
action or explain Court Administrator’s Office.
disagreement.
Effective July 6, 2026, the Clerk’s Office Criminal Supervisor began using
CourtSmart audio, on a “test” basis, to verify the accuracy of criminal dispositions
that were recorded in the case management system (MDEC). This review is in
addition to the continued use of other independent source documents to complete a
100% of all criminal cases that have had a hearing.

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditor