Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Baltimore City Community College


Related Report Dated (5/29/2026)

Video Presentation (Baltimore City Community College starts at 2:32:55)
Date: 2026-09-09
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6aa1b95d4869166052723f45
Extracted: 2026-09-14T11:19:06.653655
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC)
Report Dated May 29, 2026
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Robert A. Wells Jr., CPA
Anthony V. Calcagno, CIA
September 9, 2026

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 BCCC is an urban two-year institution and operates under the
jurisdiction of BCCC’s Board of Trustees. BCCC primarily offers
associate degrees and certifications that allow students to graduate
and enter the workforce as well as continue their education at four-
year institutions.
 This report covers the period from December 1, 2020 to June 30,
2025. The report contains 16 findings* including 6 findings that are
repeated from one or more prior audits dating back to November
2017.
 Based on the nature, significance, and duration of the findings, we
determined that BCCC’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory.
*We determined that 4 of these findings related to “cybersecurity” as defined by State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. In accordance with State Government Article 2-
1224(i) these findings were redacted from the publicly available audit report and, consequently, are not included in
this presentation.
Baltimore City Community College Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 BCCC did not document critical aspects of procurements, paid for certain
equipment that was not needed or used, and circumvented procurement
oversight and transparency requirements.
 BCCC accrued federal fund revenues of $1.4 million which BCCC
management advised may not be recoverable.
 BCCC had not established sufficient controls over financial aid and did not
take appropriate action when it identified suspected fictitious students
attempting to obtain financial aid.
 BCCC did not establish adequate controls over collections and did not
investigate missing collections resulting in the failure to identify, investigate
and pursue $23,000 in missing funds.
 BCCC wrote-off missing equipment valued at approximately $20.1 million
without an investigation or approval.
Baltimore City Community College Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements and Disbursements (Finding 1) (Repeat)
BCCC did not document critical aspects of procurements.
 BCCC did not adequately document why it used sole source procurements rather
than competitive procurements. For example, the justification for a $263,000
sole source procurement noted that although other vendors could provide the
services, the procurement was done without competition because of funding
restrictions. However, BCCC did not have documentation of this restriction.
 BCCC did not execute formal written agreements for 2 procurements totaling
$365,000. As a result, there was no documentation of the payment terms and
the specific deliverables to enable effective monitoring and proper payments.
 BCCC did not publish the 10 contract awards tested on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA).
Baltimore City Community College Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements and Disbursements (Finding 2)
BCCC did not have comprehensive procedures for participating in
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements (ICPAs).
 BCCC procedures did not include steps to ensure that participating in an ICPA
was in the best interest of the State, did not require a review of the procurement
method used for the ICPA, and did not require verification that the rates on the
BCCC contract were consistent with those on the ICPA.
 Our review of three contracts totaling $4.5 million procured under ICPAs
disclosed that for all three contracts tested, BCCC did not document that the use
of the ICPA promoted efficiency and savings and did not verify that the rates on
its contract agreed with the original ICPA.
Baltimore City Community College Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements and Disbursements (Finding 3) (Repeat)
BCCC paid for equipment and services that were not needed or used
and did not ensure that the amounts paid were consistent with the
contract and properly supported.
 BCCC paid invoices for electronic equipment (such as surveillance cameras, door
access controllers, and related licenses) totaling $508,000 that remained
unused as of the date of our test which in some cases was up to three years
after they were purchased.
 BCCC did not ensure the rates paid for these goods were accurate and
consistent with the related contracts resulting in overpayments totaling
$100,000 and underpayments totaling $58,000 going undetected.
Baltimore City Community College Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements and Disbursements (Finding 4) (Repeat)
BCCC did not consolidate procurements circumventing oversight and
transparency requirements and its leverage as a high-volume
purchaser.
 BCCC made 263 purchases from two vendors totaling approximately $638,000
without a formal competitive procurement process. For example, BCCC made
189 payments totaling $280,000 to one vendor each less than $2,500, for a
rental truck used in its workforce development courses.
 Since the purchases were not consolidated, BCCC circumvented certain
competitive procurement and approval requirements, such as publishing of
solicitation and award, and obtaining Board of Trustees approval, and did not
maximize its benefits as a high-volume purchaser.
Baltimore City Community College Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Year-End Closing Entries (Finding 5)
BCCC could not support the propriety of accrued federal fund
revenue entries totaling $1.4 million which BCCC management
advised may be unrecoverable.
 Our test of 6 accrued revenue entries totaling approximately $8.4 million
disclosed BCCC could not document that two entries totaling $1.4 million
accurately reflected amounts collectable from the federal government.
 As of December 2025, BCCC had not requested or received or any of the
aforementioned $1.4 million in federal funds.
 BCCC indicated these funds appear to be uncollectable and plans to use
unrestricted revenue funds, which may include State general funds to cover any
related deficits.
Baltimore City Community College Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Student Financial Aid (Finding 6) (Repeat)
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over significant aspects
of the financial aid award and record keeping processes.
 BCCC did not conduct independent supervisory reviews of manual adjustments
to financial aid awards. Student financial aid awards totaled approximately
$11.6 million during academic year 2024-2025. Of this amount, approximately
$5.9 million were awards which were manually input into the financial aid
system.
 BCCC did not conduct independent supervisory reviews of required verifications
of financial aid application data and satisfactory academic progress by financial
aid recipients, performed by financial aid office staff.
Baltimore City Community College Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Student Financial Aid (Finding 7)
BCCC did not take appropriate action when it identified potentially
fictitious students attempting to obtain financial aid and awarded and
distributed aid to certain of these students without proper verifications.
 BCCC could not document any follow-up action to verify the propriety of 4,394
accounts that were flagged by BCCC for further verification because they were
potentially fictitious students. During fiscal year 2025, BCCC awarded $264,392
in federal financial aid to 145 of these students of which $165,043 was
disbursed to the student.
 BCCC included these suspected fictitious students in full-time equivalent student
calculations reported to the Maryland Higher Education Commission for funding
purposes. During fiscal years 2024 and 2025 BCCC requested $635,915 in
funding for these students and had received $126,901 as of February 2026.
Baltimore City Community College Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Payroll (Finding 8) (Repeat)
BCCC did not establish adequate procedures and controls to ensure
the propriety of payroll transactions resulting in certain transactions
that were unsupported or improper.
 Our test of 10 employee additions and rate changes noted 3 rate changes
totaling $22,500 without documentation to support the changes.
 Our test of 12 leave payouts totaling $248,000 disclosed that BCCC did not have
documentation to support 2 payouts totaling $59,000.
 BCCC did not ensure employees who left State service were timely removed from
the payroll. Our review of 15 employees whose final payroll was between 17
days and 50 months after their effective termination date noted 5 employees
received regular payroll payments totaling $29,000 after termination that BCCC
could not justify.
Baltimore City Community College Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Cash Receipts (Finding 9)
BCCC did not have adequate accountability and control over certain
collections.
 Our test of 15 deposits totaling $2.7 million disclosed BCCC could not document
the initial recordation for 9 deposits totaling $2.5 million and could not
document a deposit verification for all 15 deposits.
 BCCC did not document the transfer of funds to its bank courier to establish
accountability.
 Our test of 10 chargebacks totaling approximately $1.2 million noted BCCC
wrote off 9 bank adjustments reducing deposits by $196,200 as bad debt
without obtaining supporting documentation or explanations.
Baltimore City Community College Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Cash Receipts (Finding 10)
BCCC did not take sufficient action when it identified missing
collections resulting in the failure to identify, investigate and pursue
an additional $23,000 in missing funds.
 BCCC’s investigation of $7,220 in missing funds was not adequately
documented or comprehensive. For example, BCCC did not document the
control deficiencies that enabled the missing funds to go undetected.
 BCCC did not document any attempts to identify other missing collections. Our
review identified 6 additional days with missing collections totaling $23,000
from January 2023 through June 2025. These collections were recorded in
BCCC’s internal log and the State’s accounting records but were not deposited.
Baltimore City Community College Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Corporate Purchasing Cards (Finding 11)
BCCC did not have adequate controls over corporate purchasing
card (CPC) activity. From December 1, 2020 through June 30, 2025,
CPC transactions totaled approximately $5 million across 29
cardholders. Our test of 25 CPC transactions disclosed the following:
 BCCC did not review and approve CPC activity logs as required for 16
transactions totaling $24,000. Total transactions not subject to review on the
11 related activity logs totaled $294,000.
 BCCC did not ensure that cardholders obtained sufficient documentation to
facilitate supervisory reviews, such as receiving reports, to support that the
goods/services were received for 19 transactions totaling $35,000.
 Supervisory reviews did not use Level-3 data to ensure the propriety of
purchases. Level-3 data consists of detailed descriptions of items purchased
and additional information to help detect questionable purchases.
Baltimore City Community College Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Equipment (Finding 16) (Repeat)
BCCC did not conduct required physical inventories of equipment
and wrote off missing equipment valued at approximately $20.1
million.
 BCCC only conducted one physical inventory in 2023 and did not reconcile the
results to its inventory records.
 We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that BCCC
had written off several million dollars of inventory without a proper investigation.
Based on our review, BCCC wrote off 26,018 missing equipment items (including
laptops and other computer equipment) valued at approximately $20.1 million
without performing an investigation or obtaining Department of General Services
approval, as required.
Baltimore City Community College Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
Our audit of BCCC identified numerous concerns across a wide
range of BCCC operations related to BCCC’s procurements and
disbursements, year-end closing entries, student financial aid,
payroll, cash receipts, corporate purchasing cards, and equipment.
We made detailed recommendations to BCCC and we will assess
the status of the recommendations during the course of our next
audit.
We are happy to answer any questions.
Baltimore City Community College Page 16