Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Somerset County
Date: 2026-09-08
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6aa1e1df4869166052732f7f
Extracted: 2026-09-14T11:19:22.190273
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Somerset County, Maryland
September 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 8, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Somerset County, Maryland for the period beginning February 7, 2022
and ending May 15, 2026. The Office performs various functions for the public,
including maintaining various legal records, recording certain real estate
documents, collecting related fees and taxes, and issuing certain licenses.
Our audit disclosed that the Office did not ensure that certain criminal case
dispositions were accurately recorded on the automated court system. According
to the Judiciary’s records, approximately 350 criminal cases were closed during
fiscal year 2025.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Office, is included as an
appendix to this report. We have reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Somerset County and its incorporated municipalities, and others, and
subsequently distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State's accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2025
revenues totaled $2,145,000. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $781,361 was distributed to Somerset County and its incorporated
municipalities,
 $15,377 was distributed to others, and
 $1,348,262 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The majority of the Office’s fiscal year 2025 expenditures, which totaled
$2,056,149 (see Figure 1), were salaries and wages that were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds and special purpose
funds that, according to its records, had balances totaling $44,159 as of April 30,
2026.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Somerset County
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 16
Vacant 0
Total 16
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $1,984,547
Operating Expenses 71,602
Total $2,056,149
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $1,773,800
Special Fund 216,485
Reimbursable Fund 65,864
Total $2,056,149
Source: State financial and personnel records
Findings and Recommendations
Criminal Court Case Dispositions
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system.
Analysis
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system. The courtroom clerk manually recorded
the case disposition on various documents that are used by other Office personnel
to update the Maryland Electronic Courts (MDEC) system. According to the
4

--- Page 7 ---
Judiciary’s records, there were approximately 350 criminal cases closed during
fiscal year 2025.
Our review disclosed that during most of the audit period the Office did not
routinely use independent source documentation, such as courtroom recordings, to
ensure case dispositions were accurately recorded in MDEC except for cases that
included a judgment for probation.1 Rather, supervisory personnel generally
relied on the initial record manually prepared by the courtroom clerk to ensure
that information was accurately recorded in MDEC. This process would not
identify potential discrepancies between the actual court disposition to those
recorded by the courtroom clerk since independent source documentation was not
used.
Our test of five criminal court cases,2 including four that were not supervised
probation, disclosed that the disposition of each case was accurately recorded in
MDEC. Since the aforementioned information is critical for public safety, it is
incumbent on the Office to ensure the information is accurate and properly
communicated.
In February 2026, the Judiciary issued guidance to all Clerk's Offices
recommending a regular independent review of at least ten percent of criminal
and civil cases using courtroom recordings. The Office implemented the
independent review in March 2026 and as a result, a limited number of reviews
were completed during our audit period.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office continue to ensure court dispositions are
verified by supervisory personnel, at least on a test basis, to independent
source documents (such as courtroom recordings).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Somerset County, Maryland for the period beginning February 7, 2022
and ending May 15, 2026. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
1 For criminal court cases involving supervised probation, the supporting documentation is signed
by the judge attesting to the accuracy before the disposition is recorded in MDEC. The Office
could not readily identify how many of the aforementioned 350 cases did not include probation
due to MDEC reporting limitations.
2 Case records were selected based on the case disposition, complexity of the case record, case
type, and date of the disposition.
5

--- Page 8 ---
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), certain payroll activities, bank accounts, and certain
court activities.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as human resources and payroll activities, invoice processing, and maintenance of
budgetary accounting records) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Judiciary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of February 7, 2022 to May 15, 2026, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
6

--- Page 9 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the Office’s court record systems for the purposes of
testing certain areas, such as court activities. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 12 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Somerset County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Criminal Court Case Dispositions
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system.
We recommend that the Office continue to ensure court dispositions are
verified by supervisory personnel, at least on a test basis, to independent
source documents (such as courtroom recordings).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually accurate
Please provide Our office received the audit alert in February 2026, and implemented
additional comments as the audit review by March 1, 2026. More than ten percent of cases are
deemed necessary. reviewed monthly. Logs are maintained as well as events entered in
Enterprise Justice.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/01/2026
Please provide details of Effective March 1, 2026, the Clerk’s Office has performed
corrective action or verification of criminal case dispositions and sentences, on a test
explain disagreement. basis, by consulting its court audio recording system (FTR). Prior to
the audit alert, supervisors and courtroom Clerks routinely utilized
FTR for verification of courtroom minutes.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Audit Manager
Thea A. Chimento, CFE
Senior Auditor
Tari J. Covington
Staff Auditor