Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Compliance Division - Office of Law and Oversight
Date: 2026-09-11
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6aaaa5df8a1d27e670d7bdd4
Extracted: 2026-09-21T11:19:14.142400
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
September 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 11, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Compliance Division and the Office of Law and Oversight (OLO) for
the period beginning March 16, 2022 and ending September 5, 2025. The
Division is primarily responsible for the enforcement of all tax laws administered
by COM, including those relating to individual income taxes and business taxes
such as corporate income, withholding, and sales and use taxes. The OLO is
responsible for legal matters, special litigation, appeals, and unclaimed and
abandoned property. The OLO also includes the Field Enforcement Bureau
which is included in our audit of the Office of the Comptroller of Maryland.
Our audit disclosed the Division did not always perform wage garnishments on
delinquent individual taxpayers. We identified 1,900 individuals with balances
totaling $25.5 million who collectively earned $280.7 million during calendar
years 2024 and 2025 that were not subject to wage garnishments. For example,
one individual owed $605,100 in 2018 income taxes and earned $1.7 million
between 2024 and 2025 but was not subject to wage garnishment.
Our audit also disclosed the Division’s new cloud-based tax system, referred to as
Government Premier (GPE), did not have critical functionality which had been
available on the previous automated system, SMART. The Division also did not
use available functionality to monitor and follow up on delinquent business
accounts. Furthermore, the Division did not adequately monitor individual
taxpayer accounts suspended from automated collection procedures for more than
90 days, certain of which were not justified and approved. Our audit also noted
the Division did not pursue available enforcement actions when business entities
stopped making payments on their payment plans.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit further disclosed the Division did not follow up on more than 6,000
questionable tax returns identified by its vendor or refer possible fraudulent tax
activity to the Office of the Attorney General. In addition, the Division did not
complete certain tax compliance programs resulting in 2,200 missed assessments.
Finally, our audit disclosed the Division’s procedures over tax adjustments were
not sufficiently comprehensive. For example, monthly output reports used by the
Division to review and approve tax adjustments did not include approximately
$31.8 million in adjustments made by three employees between March 2022 and
September 2025.
COM’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Division, is included as an
appendix to this report. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the
response and, while COM generally agrees with the recommendations in this
report, we identified certain instances in which statements in the response
disagree or appear to be inconsistent with a report finding and recommendation.
In each instance we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within
COM’s response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
COM.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Division.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Integrated Tax System Replacement 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Enforcement Actions
Finding 1 – The Division did not always perform wage garnishments and 8
bank attachments on delinquent individual taxpayers including
numerous delinquent accounts which had significant wages.
Finding 2 – The new cloud-based automated system referred to as 10
Government Premier (GPE) did not have critical functionality
that was available on the previous automated system. In addition,
the Division did not use GPE functionality that was available to
effectively monitor and follow up on delinquent business accounts.
Suspended Accounts
Finding 3 – The Division did not use available output reports to monitor 11
individual taxpayer accounts suspended from automated collection
procedures resulting in numerous accounts being suspended for
extended periods without adequate justification or management
approval.
Payment Plans
Finding 4 – The Division did not pursue available collection actions 12
when business entities stopped making payments on their payment
plans.
Questionable Tax Returns
Finding 5 – The Division did not follow up on 6,121 of the 6,574 12
questionable tax returns identified by its vendor and did not refer
possible fraudulent activity to the Office of Attorney General.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Tax Compliance Programs
Finding 6 – The Division did not conduct or complete certain business 14
and individual tax compliance programs (TCPs) and did not perform
supervisory reviews over individual TCPs resulting in 2,200 missed
assessments.
Tax Adjustments
* Finding 7 – The Division’s procedures for reviewing tax adjustments 15
were not sufficiently comprehensive resulting in certain adjustments
not being subject to independent review and approval.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Compliance Division’s primary responsibilities include enforcement of all
tax laws administered by the Comptroller of Maryland (COM), including
individual income taxes and business taxes such as corporate income,
withholding, and sales and use taxes. The Division conducts taxpayer audits and
investigations, collects delinquent taxes, levies tax assessments and processes tax
appeals, and performs other taxpayer compliance activities. According to the
Division’s records, as of June 30, 2025, outstanding individual income taxes
(excluding interest and penalties) and business taxes subject to collection by the
Division totaled approximately $1.6 billion and $731.1 million, respectively.
The Office of Law and Oversight (OLO) includes three units.
1. Legal, Special Litigation and Appeals (LSLA) reviews appeals of tax
assessments and denial of refund claims, and creates and manages public
guidance on tax law.
2. Unclaimed and Abandoned Property (UAP) administers the Uniform
Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act, which primarily relates to locating
and returning abandoned property.
3. Field Enforcement Bureau (FEB) monitors and enforces trade practice
regulations and revenue laws related to motor fuel, and sales and use taxes
including business licenses and testing motor fuel quality.
This audit includes the activities of the LSLA and UAP and the activities of the
FEB are included in our audit of the Office of Comptroller of Maryland.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2025, the Division’s
expenditures totaled approximately $51.1 million (see Figure 1) and collections
from its enforcement programs totaled $654.3 million which are generally
reverted to the State’s General Fund.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
Compliance and Certain1 OLO Positions,
Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 375
Vacant 13
Total 388
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $40,860,886
Technical and Special Fees 405,006
Operating Expenses 9,826,250
Total $51,092,142
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $37,128,842
Special Fund 13,963,300
Total $51,092,142
Source: State financial and personnel records
Integrated Tax System Replacement
In fiscal year 2018, with the assistance of the Maryland Department of
Information Technology, COM’s Office of the Comptroller initiated a competitive
procurement for an information technology modernization project to replace the
automated State of Maryland Tax (SMART) system. In December 2018, the
Board of Public Works approved a 10-year contract totaling approximately
$117.4 million including an additional 5-year option totaling $42.2 million for a
vendor2 to replace SMART with a new cloud-based automated system referred to
1 While the Field Enforcement Bureau is budgetarily under the Office of Law and Oversight, it is
audited separately and not included in this figure.
2 Other vendors are associated with the project to perform specific tasks such as oversight and
consulting, the “primary vendor” is responsible for system design and implementation.
6

--- Page 9 ---
as Government Premier (GPE). The COM subsequently obtained Board approval
for three modifications which increased the total contract value to approximately
$187.2 million.
As of February 2026, the vendor had been paid $117.4 million and while various
parts have been implemented during our audit period, as of April 2026, the
anticipated completion date for the system is August 2026. The procurement and
monitoring of the vendor will be included in our Office of the Comptroller audit.
We believe that the system limitations and delays have contributed to certain of
the findings identified in this report.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 3, 2024. See Figure 2 for the results of
our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Division did not always assess penalties for holders of
Finding 1 unclaimed property that failed to remit such property to the Not repeated
Division.
Adjustments to business taxpayer accounts processed by one
Repeated
Finding 2 Division unit were not always reviewed by supervisory
(Current Finding 7)
personnel as required.
The Division did not conduct required supervisory reviews
Finding 3 of State payments to taxpayers released from the Liability Not repeated
Intercept Program.
The Division only conducted a minimal number of Bay
Finding 4 Restoration Fee audits and excluded the entities that Not repeated
collected the majority of these fees.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Enforcement Actions
Background
Taxpayers are generally required to satisfy all debts at the filing date or establish a
monthly payment plan. If a taxpayer does not satisfy the debt by the filing date or
misses two consecutive payments, then their account becomes delinquent and
may be subject to one or more of the following collection actions authorized by
State law.
1) Property Liens – The Division can issue a lien notice and file the lien 30
days after the notice for debts greater than $500, and for all payment plans
exceeding 6 months. The lien instructs the courts that the tax debt is to attach
to any real or personal property and establishes the Division’s right to collect
and is the basis for all additional actions.
2) Officer Assessments – The Division can assess an officer of the business
when a business tax liability exceeds $2,500 for most tax types. An officer
assessment establishes a personal liability on the corporation’s key officers to
satisfy the tax debt. The individual could then be subject to a lien, bank
attachment, wage garnishment or license hold.
3) Bank Attachment – The Division can process a bank attachment on bank
accounts for individual and business tax liabilities exceeding $2,500 after 55
days of being delinquent. A bank attachment notifies financial institutions of
a tax debt and requires that the institution transfers the tax debtor’s funds to
the Division.
4) Wage Garnishment – The Division can process wage garnishments for
individual tax liabilities exceeding $500 after 55 days of being delinquent.
Wage garnishments are notifications to employers that a portion of an
employee’s salary must be paid to the Division to satisfy the tax debt.
5) Charter and License Holds and Referrals – The Division can process
charter and license holds for debts greater than $1,000.
Finding 1
The Division did not always perform wage garnishments and bank
attachments on delinquent individual taxpayers including numerous
delinquent accounts which had significant wages.
Analysis
The Division did not always perform wage garnishments and bank attachments on
delinquent individual taxpayers. The failure to pursue these accounts is
significant because the outstanding individual taxes increased by 53 percent from
8

--- Page 11 ---
$1.03 billion to $1.58 billion between fiscal years 2022 to 2025, many of which
were outstanding for extended periods. Specifically, according to the Division’s
records as of February 2026, there were approximately 18,300 accounts with
outstanding balances over $2,500 that had been delinquent for at least 570 days3
that were not subject to wage garnishments and bank attachments. These
accounts were not being actively pursued (were inactive) and had approximately
$251.7 million in outstanding balances from the period of January 1, 2019
through December 31, 2023.4
The use of wage garnishments and bank attachments may have assisted in
collecting outstanding individual taxes. Our Data Analytics Unit independently
obtained State wage data from the Maryland Department of Labor and matched5
the data to the aforementioned 18,300 accounts. Our match identified 1,900
individuals with balances totaling $25.5 million who earned $50,000 or more
during calendar year 2024 and/or 2025. These individuals collectively earned
$280.7 million over the two-year period. For example, one individual who owed
$605,100 in 2018 income taxes, earned $1.7 million between January 2024 and
December 2025 and was not subject to wage garnishment.
Division management advised that it did not pursue additional collection action
on these accounts because it refers delinquent accounts to the Motor Vehicle
Administration for administrative action (such as preventing the delinquent
taxpayer from renewing their driver’s license), which has been its most effective
collection tool. However, as previously noted, there were a significant number of
accounts that remained outstanding despite the current process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Division perform wage garnishments and bank
attachments for delinquent individual taxpayers.
3 According to Division workflow guidance, accounts are delinquent for at least 570 days before
the status is changed to inactive.
4 We reviewed accounts that became inactive between 2019-2023 to align with our 2024 and 2025
wage data.
5 Our analysis focused on wage garnishments since we did not readily have financial institution
data to analyze for bank attachments.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
The new cloud-based automated system referred to as Government Premier
(GPE) did not have critical functionality that was available on the previous
automated system. In addition, the Division did not use GPE functionality
that was available to effectively monitor and follow up on delinquent
business accounts.
Analysis
The GPE system did not have critical functionality that had been available on the
previous automated system, and the Division did not use GPE functionality that
was available to effectively monitor and follow up on delinquent business
accounts. For example, GPE could not accurately assign delinquent accounts to
employees to initiate collection actions or provide reports for supervisors to
monitor employee work. As a result, since the implementation of GPE for
business accounts in February 2024, the Division lacked assurance that all
available collection actions had been taken. Division management advised that
these issues were in the process of being corrected.
In addition, the Division could not document that it used available GPE reports to
assist in identifying and pursuing delinquent business accounts. In response to
our request, the Division generated a report as of November 2025, which
identified approximately 3,000 delinquent business accounts with outstanding
taxes totaling $362.7 million without GPE-generated liens. We reviewed 206 of
these accounts with delinquent balances totaling $54.1 million and noted that as
of December 2025, the Division had not taken all available collection actions for
18 of the accounts with recorded delinquent balances totaling $53 million.
Collection actions would include bank attachments, officer assessments, and
referrals to charter/license agencies.
Recommendation 2
We recommend the Division
a. ensure GPE has the required functionality to effectively identify, monitor,
and pursue delinquent business accounts; and
b. use available GPE functionality to identify, monitor, and pursue
collections for amounts due, including the cases noted above.
6 We selected our test items primarily based on materiality.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Suspended Accounts
Finding 3
The Division did not use available output reports to monitor individual
taxpayer accounts suspended from automated collection procedures resulting
in numerous accounts being suspended for extended periods without
adequate justification or management approval.
Analysis
The Division did not use available output reports to monitor individual taxpayer
accounts suspended from automated collection procedures resulting in numerous
accounts being suspended for extended periods without adequate justification or
management approval. The Division’s practice is to suspend accounts from the
automated collection for up to 90 days for various reasons (such as appeals) and
require written justification and management approval for accounts suspended for
more than 90 days. According to Division records, as of January 2026, there were
approximately 4,100 accounts with delinquent balances totaling $102.7 million
that had been suspended for between 4 and 42 months.
Our test of 14 suspended accounts7 that were more than 90 days old with
delinquent balances totaling $9.9 million disclosed that 6 accounts8 with
delinquent balances totaling $3.4 million were suspended for 8 to 22 months
without documented justification and management approval for continued
suspension beyond the original 90-day period. For example, on April 30, 2025,
the Division suspended automated collection until June 14, 2025 on 1 account
with a delinquent balance of $1.4 million because the taxpayer was scheduled for
an appeal hearing. Despite the taxpayer not appearing for the appeal hearing, the
account continued to be suspended as of February 13, 2026, (8 months after the
justified suspense period) without management approval and justification.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Division
a. use available output reports to monitor suspended accounts; and
b. obtain required justification and management approval for all accounts
suspended for more than 90 days, including those noted above.
7 We selected our test items based on materiality and users that performed a high number of
account suspensions.
8 For the 8 remaining accounts, the suspensions had expired for less than 4 months or a different
COM division was actively working on the account.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Payment Plans
Finding 4
The Division did not pursue available collection actions when business
entities stopped making payments on their payment plans.
Analysis
The Division did not pursue available collection actions when business entities
stopped making payments on their payment plans. According to Division records,
there were approximately 1,200 payment plans totaling $59.5 million, as of
February 2026.
Our test of 20 plans9 for 15 business entities with outstanding balances totaling
approximately $9.7 million disclosed that 7 plans with balances totaling $4
million were still listed as compliant even though the entity had not made
payments for periods ranging from 2 to 13 months. For example, 1 entity with a
balance of approximately $370,000 as of December 9, 2025, was listed as
compliant even though no payments had been made since January 1, 2025.
We were advised by Division management that this condition was caused, at least
in part, because GPE collection functions automatically triggered by defaulted
payment plans could not be relied on. As a result, the Division had to use a
manual review process to verify the delinquent status of each individual plan
while corrections were being made to the system.
Recommendation 4
We recommend the Division ensure collection actions are taken for non-
compliant payment plans, including those noted above.
Questionable Tax Returns
Finding 5
The Division did not follow up on 6,121 of the 6,574 questionable tax returns
identified by its vendor and did not refer possible fraudulent activity to the
Office of Attorney General (OAG).
Analysis
The Division did not follow up on 6,121 of the 6,574 questionable tax returns
identified by its vendor and did not refer instances of possible fraudulent returns
9 Our test items were selected based on materiality.
12

--- Page 15 ---
to the OAG. The Division contracted with a vendor to perform various services
including identifying questionable tax returns for the period from July 2021 to
June 2026 with two one-year options.10 Between March 2022 and September
2025, the vendor assessed 6,574 returns (5,968 individual and 606 business) as
questionable.
Our review disclosed that the Division did not document its follow-up on 5,528 of
the 5,968 (93 percent) individual returns, and 593 of the 606 (98 percent) business
tax returns that the vendor identified as questionable despite indications that an
expanded review may have resulted in increased assessments. For example, the
vendor noted that one deduction11 accounted for 198 (33 percent) of the
questionable business tax returns it identified. Although the Division determined
that 6 of the 7 businesses it reviewed could not support the deduction resulting in
$1.3 million in additional taxes due, it did not follow up on the other 191 business
returns with the same questionable deduction.
In addition, the Division did not refer possible fraudulent activity to the OAG.
For example, the vendor noted that one tax preparer was responsible for 1,503 (25
percent) of the questionable individual tax returns and the Division’s follow-up on
88 of these questionable returns resulted in approximately $1 million in additional
assessments. The Division did not take any actions on the other 1,415 individual
tax returns filed by this one tax preparer and did not refer the tax preparer to the
OAG to determine whether criminal charges would be appropriate.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Division
a. develop a comprehensive plan to conduct documented reviews of
questionable returns identified by its vendor and expand testing when
patterns of questionable activity are identified, including those noted
above; and
b. refer any possible criminal activity to the OAG, including those noted
above.
10 In addition to utilizing a vendor to identify questionable tax returns (which includes entries such
as unusually high credits or deductions), COM has various internal processes to monitor returns.
11 The questionable area related to high rates of net operating losses.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Tax Compliance Programs
Finding 6
The Division did not conduct or complete certain business and individual tax
compliance programs (TCPs) and did not perform supervisory reviews over
individual TCPs resulting in 2,200 missed assessments.
Analysis
The Division did not conduct or complete certain business and individual TCPs
and did not perform supervisory reviews over individual TCPs. The Division
conducts several types of TCPs for businesses and individuals designed to
identify and pursue taxpayers who do not file required income tax returns or
report all income. Taxpayers identified by the TCPs are sent assessments of the
additional taxes owed and requests for payment. If the taxpayer does not pay or
enter a payment plan in response to the TCP, the Division will pursue other
enforcement actions.
 The Division did not conduct two longstanding TCPs that identified business
entities that had not filed a tax return for at least six months or had their
federal tax returns changed based on IRS adjustments.12 We were advised
these TCPs where discontinued in February 2024 due to issues with the GPE
system and staffing limitations, respectively. During fiscal year 2023, (which
was the last full year the programs were performed), these TCPs resulted in
additional assessments totaling approximately $9.3 million and $443,100,
respectively.
 The Division did not peform supervisory reviews over individual TCPs. As a
result, it did not identify that one of the 12 individual taxpayer TCPs which
accounted for $104.5 million in 2025 assessments was not completed.
Specifically, our test of 6 of the 12 TCPs for individual taxpayers13 disclosed
that the Division did not issue assessments for the results of 1 TCP to
approximately 2,200 (6 percent) of the 36,300 potentially delinquent
taxpayers until we brought this to its attention in October 2025. We could not
readily determine the value of the missing assessments.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the Division
a. ensure all business and individual taxpayer TCPs are conducted and
completed; and
12 For example, if the IRS decreases a deduction this may cause an increase in the business’
revenue and liability to the State.
13 These TCPs were selected for testing based upon materiality.
14

--- Page 17 ---
b. perform supervisory reviews over individual TCPs to ensure assessments
are issued for all individual TCPs, including those noted above.
Tax Adjustments
Finding 7
The Division’s procedures for reviewing tax adjustments were not
sufficiently comprehensive resulting in certain adjustments not being subject
to independent review and approval.
Analysis
The Division’s procedures for reviewing tax adjustments were not sufficiently
comprehensive resulting in certain adjustments not being subject to independent
review and approval. Tax adjustments, such as removing penalties and interest,
were made for various reasons, such as when an error was made. According to
the Division’s records, between March 2022 and September 2025, 41 Division
employees recorded approximately 5,800 tax adjustments which reduced business
tax liabilities by $69.6 million.
Our review disclosed that certain adjustments were not subject to independent
review and approval. For example, the monthly output reports which the Division
used to review and approve adjustments did not include the tax adjustments made
by three employees who processed approximately 2,600 (45 percent) of the
adjustments totaling $31.8 million. Our test of 15 tax adjustments14 performed by
the three employees, which reduced tax liabilities by $17.2 million, did not
identify any improper adjustments.
A similar condition regarding not reviewing adjustments was noted in our three
preceding audit reports dating back to April 2017. In its response to our
preceding report COM, on behalf of the Division, agreed to ensure that a
reasonable number of critical adjustments identified on output reports would be
reviewed by a supervisor and that documentation would be retained by September
2024. The Division could not explain why output reports did not include all
adjustments and reviews were not completed.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the Division establish comprehensive procedures to
ensure the propriety of all tax adjustments, including those noted above
(repeat).
14 We selected our test items based on adjustment type and materiality.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) - Compliance Division and two units within the Office of Law and
Oversight Division for the period beginning March 16, 2022 and ending
September 5, 2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Division’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the identification, assessment, and collection of
individual income taxes and various business taxes; and the identification,
collection, and distribution of unclaimed property. Our information systems
security and control review addressed personally identifiable information and
cloud computing. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Division by
COM – Office of the Comptroller. These support services (such as processing of
invoices, maintenance of accounting records, human resources, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the
Comptroller. In addition, our audit did not include certain support services
provided to the Division by COM – Central Payroll Bureau. These support
services (payroll processing) are included within the scope of our audit of the
Central Payroll Bureau. Furthermore, our audit did not include certain support
services provided to the Division by COM – Information Technology Division
related to the monitoring of information technology equipment and services and
the operation of the Annapolis Data Center. The operation of the Annapolis Data
Center includes the development and maintenance of Division applications and
maintenance of the operating system and security software environment. These
support services are included in the scope of our audit of the Information
Technology Division.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 16, 2022 to September 5, 2025, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Division’s operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from COM’s automated State of Maryland Tax systems –
SMART and GPE, and the systems used by the Division to account for and
monitor unclaimed property for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as
collection activity and the disposition of unclaimed property. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data was sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data was used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Division’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
17

--- Page 20 ---
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Division, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Division’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Division that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the COM, on behalf of the Division to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise COM regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions
As of July 2026
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 State agency vendor payment processing
General
1 Accounting  Vendor table maintenance 09/25/24
Division  State agency working funds
 Corporate purchasing card program
Office of the
 Capital grants monitoring
Comptroller
Bureau of Revenue  Procurement and disbursements
2 05/06/24
Estimates, and  Support services to other divisions of the Comptroller, such as
Field Enforcement processing invoices, maintenance of accounting records,
Bureau human resources, and related fiscal functions
Information
Technology
3  Maintenance and monitoring of mainframe operating systems, 04/22/24
Division –
various security functions, and critical databases
Annapolis Data
Center Operations
 Processing, evaluating, verifying, and recording tax data as
Revenue
reported by taxpayers and other parties
4 01/22/24
Administration
 Collection of tax receipts
Division
 Distribution of tax refunds
 Management of the State payroll system
 Non-budgeted funds maintained for payroll deductions
5 Central Payroll 10/05/23
 Critical information systems
Bureau
 Support services to other units of the Comptroller for
processing payroll timekeeping records
 Procurement
Information
 Equipment
Technology
6  Support services to other units of the Comptroller for 02/02/22
Division (Fiscal
monitoring information technology related services and
Operations)
maintaining information technology equipment inventory
records
19

--- Page 22 ---
APPENDIX
September 9, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed is the Comptroller of Maryland’s response to your fiscal compliance audit report
of the Comptroller of Maryland – Compliance Division for the period beginning March 16, 2022
and ending September 5, 2025.
We have carefully reviewed each finding and believe that our written responses satisfy each
recommendation in the report. If any additional information is needed, please contact Buthany
Nuon, Director – Governance, Risk, and Compliance at bnuon@marylandtaxes.gov or by phone
at 410-260-6267.
The Comptroller appreciates your objective and fair appraisal of our operations and the
associated recommendations made for improvement. We would also like to commend your audit
team for their professionalism during the audit, and for performing a thorough review of the
Compliance Division.
09:40:19 -04'00' _August 28, 2026_
Compliance Director Date
Erica Roach Roach
Date: 2026.08.28 09:58:04
-04'00'
Agency Head Date

--- Page 23 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Enforcement Actions
Finding 1
The Division did not always perform wage garnishments and bank
attachments on delinquent individual taxpayers including numerous
delinquent accounts which had significant wages.
We recommend that the Division perform wage garnishments and bank
attachments for delinquent individual taxpayers.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Individual wage garnishments and individual bank attachments are part of the
additional comments as collections flow but are not mandated to be utilized. These processes were
deemed necessary. turned off in the SMART legacy system in lieu of the MVA hold process and
have been performed since 2011.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/30/26
Please provide details of Streamlined garnishment and attachment functionality will be available in the
corrective action or new modernized tax system, GPE Release 3, being rolled out in September
explain disagreement. 2026. This will allow the Collection Unit to utilize these tools in conjunction
with the MVA hold process. It is important to note that, according to historic
trends, the MVA hold process has proven to be the section’s most effective
collection tool. This strategy resulted in a record year for personal income tax
collections totaling $679M in FY 2026.
Page 1 of 10

--- Page 24 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
The new cloud-based automated system referred to as Government Premier
(GPE) did not have critical functionality that was available on the previous
automated system. In addition, the Division did not use GPE functionality
that was available to effectively monitor and follow up on delinquent
business accounts.
We recommend the Division
a. ensure GPE has the required functionality to effectively identify, monitor,
and pursue delinquent business accounts; and
b. use available GPE functionality to identify, monitor, and pursue
collections for amounts due, including the cases noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide As of September 1st, functionality in GPE that was previously unavailable in
additional comments as SMART became available to the Individual Income Tax unit. Because enforced
deemed necessary. compliance actions can significantly affect businesses and individuals, extreme
care was taken to safeguard against errors and unintended enforcement actions.
Collection actions will continue to be added over the coming weeks.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/30/26
Please provide details of The Division will utilize this functionality now that GPE has been
corrective action or implemented. This will assist the Division in effectively identifying,
explain disagreement. monitoring, and pursuing delinquent business accounts.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The reviews of the cases noted above have been completed. Throughout this
corrective action or review, the Division identified accounts with delinquent balances that included
explain disagreement. uncollectable items, reducing the total significantly below the amount
originally presented.
The Division uses a combination of available GPE functionality and business
processes to achieve desired results. In FY 2023, prior to the rollout of GPE,
the Division produced 1,584 liens. In FY 2026, 2,150 liens were processed for
a total of $53,120,837.52.
Page 2 of 10

--- Page 25 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: COM notes that our analysis is not factually accurate
because as of September 1st, functionality in GPE that was previously unavailable
in SMART became available to the Individual Income Tax unit. However, this
finding focuses on the GPE functionality to effectively monitor business accounts
which Division management advised during fieldwork was in the process of being
corrected. As a result, we continue to believe that the analysis is accurate.
Page 3 of 10

--- Page 26 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Suspended Accounts
Finding 3
The Division did not use available output reports to monitor individual
taxpayer accounts suspended from automated collection procedures resulting
in numerous accounts being suspended for extended periods without
adequate justification or management approval.
We recommend that the Division
a. use available output reports to monitor suspended accounts; and
b. obtain required justification and management approval for all accounts
suspended for more than 90 days, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The Division has a process in place to review suspended accounts. However,
additional comments as the 90-day timeframe in the collections flow is not the Division’s policy.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/15/26
Please provide details of The Division will establish an escalation procedure to address any accounts that
corrective action or have been suspended for more than 90 days after they have been received.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/15/26
Please provide details of The Division will utilize available output reports to monitor suspended
corrective action or accounts. The Division will also explore collection holds to require an end date.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 10

--- Page 27 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Payment Plans
Finding 4
The Division did not pursue available collection actions when business
entities stopped making payments on their payment plans.
We recommend the Division ensure collection actions are taken for non-
compliant payment plans, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide As noted above, enforced compliance actions can significantly affect
additional comments as businesses and individuals. Extreme care is given to safeguard against errors
deemed necessary. and unintended enforcement actions. The attention to these safeguards
impacted automated collection flows when business entities stop making
payments on payment plans. Of the examples provided, we identified that the
impact was less than the originally indicated amount.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/26
Please provide details of The Division will continue to conduct collection actions for non-compliant
corrective action or payment plans, including those noted above. The collections team will utilize
explain disagreement. existing functionality and business processes to continue these efforts. In FY
2026, the business collections team processed 1,423 payment plans for a total
of $69,297,515.88.
Page 5 of 10

--- Page 28 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Questionable Tax Returns
Finding 5
The Division did not follow up on 6,121 of the 6,574 questionable tax returns
identified by its vendor and did not refer possible fraudulent activity to the
Office of Attorney General (OAG).
We recommend that the Division
a. develop a comprehensive plan to conduct documented reviews of
questionable returns identified by its vendor and expand testing when
patterns of questionable activity are identified, including those noted
above; and
b. refer any possible criminal activity to the OAG, including those noted
above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide COM has a comprehensive program for identifying questionable returns. That
additional comments as data reviewed was extracted from several tools available within the data
deemed necessary. warehouse that are intended to support audit research, not fraud identification.
As a result, the entries included in the report do not necessarily represent
fraudulent activity. Instead, they reflect returns processed within the specified
category and should not be interpreted as confirmed fraudulent leads.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/15/26
Please provide details of The Division generates leads from multiple sources for the audit teams to
corrective action or review. Based on the priority level of the available programs, the audit teams
explain disagreement. take a sample from each filter to determine whether additional reviews are
needed. Due to limited budget and staffing resources, the Division cannot
feasibly review every lead generated from all available sources on a one-to-one
basis. To manage this volume effectively, the Division uses a risk-based
sampling approach to select leads for review. In FY 2026, the post-audit team
utilized a risk-based sampling approach and worked on 14,479 cases for an
assessment total of $3,776,258.46.
Page 6 of 10

--- Page 29 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/26
Please provide details of The Division will continue to refer any potential fraudulent activity to the
corrective action or OAG.
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 10

--- Page 30 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Tax Compliance Programs
Finding 6
The Division did not conduct or complete certain business and individual tax
compliance programs (TCPs) and did not perform supervisory reviews over
individual TCPs resulting in 2,200 missed assessments.
We recommend that the Division
a. ensure all business and individual taxpayer TCPs are conducted and
completed; and
b. perform supervisory reviews over individual TCPs to ensure assessments
are issued for all individual TCPs, including those noted above.
Page 8 of 10

--- Page 31 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The Compliance team prioritizes conducting TCPs that generate the
additional comments as greatest ROI for the state.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/26
Please provide details of The Division will ensure that business and individual taxpayer TCPs are fully
corrective action or conducted and completed. Automated compliance programs generate leads for
explain disagreement. the ITA team, and these leads are prioritized and executed in accordance with
established guidelines, which also take into account each program’s historical
performance. A risk-based sampling approach is used to determine whether
additional reviews are warranted. While parameters are in place to assess
program outputs, current budgetary constraints and staffing levels do not allow
for one-to-one reviews of all generated leads. In FY 2026, the ITA section
completed 39,129 audits, resulting in $73,785,967.99.
For the business team, the Division intentionally discontinued the RAR
program to focus on research that could produce higher-value audit
opportunities and invested in internal training to build the capacity to address
more complex audit issues. The intention is to maximize the ROI for the hours
worked by each available auditor. In FY 2026, the BTA team completed 712
audits totaling $41,624,497.11. In FY 2027, the BTA team will utilize some of
the new PINs provided to reinstate the RAR audits. This will be a good
learning tool for newly hired auditors. Also, it’s worth noting that none of the
prior RAR leads are out of statute. Finally, both units exceeded the audit plan
approved for the fiscal year.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/26
Please provide details of The Division will create a formal procedure to perform supervisory reviews of
corrective action or individual TCPs to ensure that assessments are issued for all individual TCPs,
explain disagreement. including those noted above.
Page 9 of 10

--- Page 32 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
Office of Law and Oversight
Agency Response Form
Tax Adjustments
Finding 7
The Division’s procedures for reviewing tax adjustments were not
sufficiently comprehensive resulting in certain adjustments not being subject
to independent review and approval.
We recommend that the Division establish comprehensive procedures to
ensure the propriety of all tax adjustments, including those noted above
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The prior audit report’s Finding 2 raised that adjustments to business taxpayer
additional comments as accounts identified in the output reports were not always reviewed by an
deemed necessary. auditor. OLA considers this a repeat finding in the current report; however,
there was no procedural error. The review could not be completed
comprehensively because the content of the output reports was truncated, and
has now been resolved in GPE.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of All tax adjustments are now reported in the output report as intended. The
corrective action or Division will compare the adjustment results vs. the output report to ensure the
explain disagreement. information is accurate going forward.
None of the adjustments reviewed by OLA had been incorrectly completed.
Page 10 of 10

--- Page 33 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Matusala Y. Abishe
Senior Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Kevin M. Billard
Joshua H. Leff
Paul A. McGrew
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Nga T. Nguyen Simmons
Staff Auditors