Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Harford County
Date: 2026-09-24
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6ab5789227051cb0f508e9df
Extracted: 2026-10-05T11:20:23.657020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Harford County, Maryland
September 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 24, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Harford County, Maryland for the period beginning July 1, 2022 and
ending July 20, 2026. The Office performs various functions for the public,
including maintaining various legal records, recording certain real estate
documents, collecting related fees and taxes, and issuing certain licenses.
Our audit disclosed that the Office did not ensure that certain criminal case
dispositions were accurately recorded on the automated court system. According
to the Judiciary’s records, 2,271 criminal cases were closed during fiscal year
2025, of which 553 cases were not routinely subject to independent review.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Office, is included as an
appendix to this report. We have reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendation, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Harford County and its incorporated municipalities, and others, and
subsequently distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2025
revenues totaled $13,998,161. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $450,547 was distributed to Harford County and its incorporated
municipalities,
 $128,251 was distributed to others, and
 $13,419,363 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the
State for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The majority of the Office’s fiscal year 2025 expenditures, which totaled
$6,409,692 (see Figure 1), were salaries and wages that were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds and special purpose
funds that, according to its records, had balances totaling $1,718,803 as of June
30, 2026.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Harford County
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 53
Vacant 0
Total 53
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $6,016,739
Operating Expenses 392,953
Total $6,409,692
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $4,807,131
Special Fund 1,537,526
Reimbursable Fund 65,035
Total $6,409,692
Source: State financial and personnel records
Findings and Recommendations
Criminal Court Case Dispositions
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system.
Analysis
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system. The courtroom clerk manually recorded
the case disposition on various documents that are used by other Office personnel
to update the Maryland Electronic Courts (MDEC) system. According to the
Judiciary’s records, there were 2,271 criminal cases closed during fiscal year
2025.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our review disclosed that the Office did not routinely use independent source
documentation, such as courtroom recordings, to ensure case dispositions were
accurately recorded in MDEC except for cases that included a judgment for
probation.1 Rather, supervisory personnel generally relied on the initial record
manually prepared by the courtroom clerk to ensure that information was
accurately recorded in MDEC. This process would not identify potential
discrepancies between the actual court disposition to those recorded by the
courtroom clerk since independent source documentation was not used.
During fiscal year 2025, 553 of the aforementioned cases did not include a
judgment for probation and would not have been subject to an independent
review. Our test of 10 criminal court cases,2 including 3 that were not supervised
probation, disclosed that the disposition of each case was accurately recorded in
MDEC. Since the aforementioned information is critical for public safety, it is
incumbent on the Office to ensure the information is accurate and properly
communicated.
In February 2026, the Judiciary alerted all Clerk’s Offices of our recent audit
findings recommending that supervisory reviews of criminal court dispositions
include a documented review of courtroom recordings.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office ensure criminal court dispositions are
verified by supervisory personnel, at least on a test basis, to independent
source documents (such as courtroom recordings).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Harford County, Maryland for the period beginning July 1, 2022 and
ending July 20, 2026. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
1 For criminal court cases involving supervised probation, the supporting documentation is signed
by the judge attesting to the accuracy before the disposition is recorded in MDEC.
2 Case records were selected between October 2024 and July 2026 based on the case disposition,
complexity of the case record, case type, and date of the disposition.
5

--- Page 8 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), certain payroll activities, bank accounts, and certain
court activities.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as human resources and payroll activities, invoice processing, and maintenance of
budgetary accounting records) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Judiciary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2022 to July 20, 2026, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit.
6

--- Page 9 ---
We also extracted data from the Office’s court record systems for the purposes of
testing certain areas, such as court activities. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of the Office, to our finding and
recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 11 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Harford County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Criminal Court Case Dispositions
Finding 1
The Office did not ensure certain criminal case dispositions were accurately
recorded on the automated court system.
We recommend that the Office ensure criminal court dispositions are
verified by supervisory personnel, at least on a test basis, to independent
source documents (such as courtroom recordings).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Harford County Circuit Clerk’s Office has had a number of
additional comments as supervisory review processes in place that resulted in a 100% review of
deemed necessary. all criminal cases that have had a hearing. While this review includes
hearing sheets and probation and release orders, it has not included the
verification of criminal dispositions by reviewing court audio recordings,
at least on a test basis. For FY25 there were 2,271 criminal cases closed
of which all were reviewed for accuracy by the Courtroom Supervisor.
Of those cases, 1,718 or 75%, had an order for verification. Probation
and Release orders are the independent source documents that have been
reviewed and signed by a judge. The Clerk of the Circuit Court for
Harford County recognizes that although the recommendation to utilize
“…on a test basis…independent source documents, such as courtroom
recordings” is a valid suggestion, it was, however, never a published
recommendation of any past audit of the Office of Legislative Audits,
nor a requirement of our 2025 Internal Audit.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2026
Please provide details of The Harford County Clerk’s Office, with the recent knowledge of this
corrective action or new audit requirement, has obtained audio recordings from Court
explain disagreement. Administration as we do not have direct access to the CourtSmart court
recording system. We have also been working with our Administrative
Judge to develop a new independent source document that will be
reviewed and signed by a judge to meet this requirement. Effective
October 1, 2026, the Clerk’s Office Courtroom Clerks will be using a
new order requiring a judge’s signature for criminal commitments. The
courtroom clerks will also begin using audio files as part of an updated
docketing process to enhance quality assurance. The Supervisor of the
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Harford County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Courtroom Clerk Department will, on a “test” basis, verify the accuracy
of criminal dispositions that were recorded in the case management
system (MDEC). This review is in addition to the continued use of other
independent source documents to review criminal cases that have had a
hearing.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Johanna K. Bachman, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditor