Title: Department of Budget and Management - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 2026-09-23
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6ab6cf1927051cb0f50928cb
Extracted: 2026-10-05T11:20:33.791233
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 23, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Budget and
Management’s (DBM) Office of the Secretary, which includes the Central
Collection Unit (CCU), and certain other units of DBM for the period beginning
January 16, 2022 and ending September 30, 2025. DBM assists the Governor in
the preparation and monitoring of the State’s annual operating and capital
budgets, and is responsible for administering the State Travel Management
Program. CCU is responsible for collecting delinquent debts owed to the State,
except those excluded by law (such as taxes and child support), and its collections
totaled $185.1 million during fiscal year 2025.
Our audit disclosed that CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments from
debtors it identified through quarterly matches of its accounts with State wage
data. A similar condition has been noted in our nine preceding audit reports
dating back to 1997 but was not sufficiently corrected. For example, CCU did not
pursue wage garnishments for three of these accounts totaling $846,900 that had
monthly wages totaling $21,200 because its new automated collection system was
missing the designation that an initial letter was sent to the debtor, which triggers
the wage garnishment process. Additionally, CCU did not pursue all available
collection action when debtors with uninsured motorist penalty fees defaulted on
payment plans.
Our audit also disclosed DBM also did not monitor travel arrangements booked
by State employees to ensure it was aware of international travel that required
approval and did not follow up when agencies used business class travel for
domestic flights, which is prohibited by travel regulations.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
DBM’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of DBM’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the
response and, while DBM generally agrees with the recommendations in this
report, we identified certain instances in which statements in the response
disagree or appear to be inconsistent with a report finding and recommendation.
In each instance we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within
DBM’s response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
DBM.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DBM.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Central Collection Unit (CCU)
* Finding 1 – CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments from debtors 8
it identified through quarterly matches of its accounts with State wage
data.
Finding 2 – CCU did not always pursue all available collection action 10
when debtors with uninsured motorist penalty fees defaulted on
payment plans.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 11
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 11
Statewide Travel Program
Finding 5 – DBM did not monitor international travel by State employees, 11
as required, and did not follow up when agencies used business class
for domestic flights which is prohibited by travel regulations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) is responsible for assisting
the Governor in the preparation and monitoring of the State’s annual operating
and capital budgets. This audit includes the Office of the Secretary (including
Executive Direction, the Division of Finance and Administration, and the Central
Collections Unit (CCU)), the Office of Budget Analysis, and the Office of Capital
Budgeting. DBM’s Office of Personnel Services and Benefits, which directs the
State’s personnel policies and administers the health care benefits programs for
State employees and retirees, is audited and reported upon separately.
According to State records, DBM’s expenditures totaled approximately $57.8
million during fiscal year 2025, of which $22.9 million related to CCU (see
Figure 1).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
DBM’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Office of the Secretary Office of
Budget
Executive
Central Analysis and
Direction, Division Totals
Collection Office of
of Finance and
Unit Capital
Administration
Budgeting
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Filled 26 115 40 181
Vacant 7 5 3 15
Total 33 120 43 196
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and
$ 5,235,364 $13,887,819 $ 7,027,070 $26,150,253
Fringe Benefits
Technical and Special Fees 471,555 382,920 65,764 920,239
Operating Expenses 18,949,222 8,704,383 3,123,109 30,776,714
Total $24,656,141 $22,975,122 $10,215,943 $57,847,206
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
General Fund $ 5,109,516 $ - $ 8,851,875 $13,961,391
Special Fund - 22,975,122 - 22,975,122
Federal Fund 16,386,746 - - 16,386,746
Reimbursable Fund 3,159,879 - 1,364,068 4,523,947
Total $24,656,141 $22,975,122 $10,215,943 $57,847,206
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 24, 2023. See Figure 2 for the results of
our review.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 1 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted1
CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments
from debtors, and it had not established a formal system for Repeated
Finding 2
prioritizing such activity as committed to in its response to this (Current Finding 1)
longstanding issue in our preceding audit report.
CCU did not have adequate controls over the abatement of
Finding 3 accounts, which totaled approximately $5.9 million during our Not repeated
audit period.
CCU did not adequately monitor long-term deviations from
Finding 4 State regulations previously granted to State agencies regarding Not repeated
submission of delinquent accounts to CCU.
DBM did not verify that electronic receipts collected by a
third-party vendor for CCU were deposited into the State's
Finding 5 Not repeated
bank account and accurately recorded in the State's accounting
records.
Finding 6 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted1
Finding 7 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted1
Finding 8 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted1
DBM did not determine the reasonableness of charges related
Finding 9 to technology enterprise services from the Department of Not repeated
Information Technology, which were valued at $4.1 million.
1 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity-related finding
has been redacted from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Central Collection Unit
Background
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) – Central Collection Unit
(CCU) collects delinquent accounts owed to the State, except those excluded by
law (such as taxes and child support). State law authorizes CCU to assess and
collect a fee sufficient to cover all collection and administrative costs, not to
exceed 20 percent of the outstanding principal and interest. CCU’s collection fee
is currently established at 17 percent, which is added to the original amount of the
debt.
Figure 3
According to its records, the balance
of outstanding debt referred to CCU Outstanding Debt and Collections
for collection was approximately $3.4 Fiscal Years 2023-2025
billion as of June 30, 2025 (see Figure
Year End
Fiscal Annual
3). The balance of outstanding debt
Debt
Year Collections*
increased approximately $700 million
Balance
from June 30, 2023 to June 30, 2025.
2023 $2.7 billion $103.4
The majority of the increase and the
million
associated balance is attributable to
2024 $2.9 billion $126.5
referrals of uncollected electronic
million
tolls from the Maryland
2025 $3.4 billion $185.1
Transportation Authority.
million
*Collections are net of collection fees and account
CCU uses a variety of automated and adjustments (such as refunds).
manual processes to collect
Source: CCU records
delinquent accounts. Automated
collection efforts include the use of the
State’s Tax Refund Intercept Program (TRIP) to capture debtor State tax refunds,
and other automated intercept programs. Manual collection efforts include
pursuing voluntary payments (such as payment plan agreements) and forwarding
selected accounts for proactive non-voluntary collection actions, such as wage
garnishments and property liens.
Collections on debt, less CCU’s fees, are generally paid either to the State
Treasury or to the unit of State government where the debt originated. According
to CCU’s records, the majority of $185.1 million in fiscal year 2025 collections
resulted from TRIP and manual CCU processes (see Figure 4).
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 4
CCU Fiscal Year 2025 Debt Collections by Source
Manual
Referring MDH ASO
Agency 2% Repayment 2%**
Automated
(Other)* 11%
Manual CCU
44%
Automated
Private
TRIP 40%
Collection
Agency 1%
* Includes State Payroll and Vendor Payment Intercepts, Lottery and certain Casino Winnings Intercepts, and
Federal Tax Refund Intercepts.
** Includes repayments from Maryland Department of Health Administrative Service Organization (MDH
ASO) providers relating to unsupported estimated payments to providers.
Source: CCU Records
Finding 1
CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments from debtors it identified
through quarterly matches of its accounts with State wage data.
Analysis
CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments from debtors it identified through
quarterly matches of its accounts with State wage data. CCU’s debt collection
policies provide that it will pursue wage garnishments on accounts with debts
greater than $750 that are not making payments if the debtor has monthly wages
of at least $1,200. As of October 2025, CCU records indicated that 54,920
debtors had wages and were eligible for wage garnishment with debts totaling
$240.8 million during the period January 2022 to September 2025. CCU had only
pursued wage garnishments for 688 of these debtors with debts totaling $4.4
million.
8

--- Page 11 ---
While CCU informed us that it conducted quarterly matches of its accounts with
State wage data to identify accounts for wage garnishments, our review disclosed
that CCU did not always pursue garnishments for the matches. Specifically, our
test of 15 accounts2 on CCU’s October 2025 quarterly match with outstanding
debts totaling approximately $8.2 million and monthly wages of $72,200
disclosed that CCU had not pursued wage garnishments for any of the debtors.
Several factors contributed to the wage garnishments not being pursued.
For example, CCU did not pursue wage garnishments for 3 of these accounts
totaling $846,900 that had monthly wages totaling $21,200 because its new
automated collection system was missing the designation that an initial letter was
sent to the debtor, which triggers the wage garnishment process. CCU
management was unaware that the designation was missing until we brought the
matter to their attention and subsequently advised that these accounts were
missing this designation due to a coding error when CCU transitioned to a new
collection system in 2018. CCU could not readily determine the number of
accounts that were not pursued for wage garnishment due to the missing
designation.3
Similar conditions regarding wage garnishments were noted in our nine prior
audit reports dating back to 1997. In response to our preceding report, CCU
agreed with our recommendations to pursue wage garnishments when practicable
but advised that executing a wage garnishment is an expensive and lengthy
process. CCU further advised that it used its limited resources to pursue debts
that are likely to produce the best recoveries.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DBM
a. take appropriate action to pursue potential wage garnishments from
debtors and document its efforts (repeat); and
b. review debtor accounts missing the aforementioned designation to
determine the correct status of the account, update the status as needed,
and take any other needed follow-up action (such as pursuing wage
garnishments).
2 We selected the highest account balances on the October 2025 wage report that also had monthly
wages greater than $1,200.
3 According to CCU’s records, as of March 2026, approximately 1.4 million accounts were
missing the designation. Certain of these accounts may have had a garnishment processed prior
to the transition or may not be eligible for a garnishment (for example, if no wages were
reported).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
CCU did not always pursue all available collection actions when debtors with
uninsured motorist penalty fees defaulted on payment plans.
Analysis
CCU did not always pursue all available collection actions when debtors with
uninsured motorist penalty fees defaulted on payment plans. Debtors can enter
into legally binding payment plans for their insurance penalty fees which allow
them to register their vehicles. If the debtor defaults, the payment plan states
CCU can immediately pursue collection of the remaining debt along with a 17
percent collection fee and refer the accounts to the Motor Vehicle Administration
(MVA) to take administrative action (such as preventing the debtor from
renewing their vehicle registration).4 We were advised by CCU that such action
(warning letters and legal action to collect the remaining debt) will be pursued for
payment plans in default for more than 60 days that have a balance over $750.
According to CCU records as of February 2026, 31,094 of the 49,668 insurance-
related payment plans over $750 (63 percent) defaulted.5
Our test of 10 payment plans6 that defaulted during the period from October 2022
to October 2025 with related balances totaling approximately $90,400 disclosed
that although CCU referred them to MVA for administrative action, they did not
pursue all remaining available collection actions allowed by its policy. For
example, CCU did not send warning letters for 8 payment plans defaulted for
between 4 and 40 months as of February 2026 with related balances totaling
$72,100. The remaining two payment plans had warning letters sent to debtors
but no other collection action was taken.
CCU management advised that it did not pursue collection on the defaulted
accounts because of the resources it would take to pursue collection and it relies
on the MVA administrative action to address the issue. CCU management further
advised that it believed its current process was sufficient as approximately 60
percent of the defaulted plans resolve themselves within two years. We did not
attempt to verify the 60 percent resolution rate but as noted above, we identified
plans that were defaulted for significantly longer than two years that were not
subject to all available collection actions. CCU ultimately agreed that going
forward it would pursue additional collection actions after a certain period of time
has passed and will develop a policy reflecting this process.
4 The debts on defaulted payment plans are also subject to ongoing automated collection efforts
(such as TRIP).
5 An individual debtor could have multiple payment plans if the debtor had multiple accounts for
uninsured motorist penalty fees.
6 Test items selected based on materiality of the payment plan balance.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBM pursue available collection actions when debtors
default on uninsured motorist penalty fee payment plans.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 3 and 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DBM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Statewide Travel Program
Finding 5
DBM did not monitor international travel by State employees, as required,
and did not follow up when agencies used business class for domestic flights
which is prohibited by travel regulations.
Analysis
DBM did not monitor international travel by State employees, as required, and did
not follow up when agencies used business class for domestic flights which is
prohibited by travel regulations. According to DBM’s travel vendor records,
during fiscal year 2025, bookings through the State’s travel vendor totaled
approximately $3 million for both international and domestic flights. We tested
10 international flights totaling approximately $83,400 and 5 domestic flights
11

--- Page 14 ---
totaling approximately $9,1007 booked during fiscal year 2025 and noted the
following:
 DBM did not monitor international travel booked through the State’s travel
vendor resulting in the failure to approve 7 international flights totaling
$65,400, including 5 first-class tickets totaling $26,900. For example, DBM
did not approve 2 business class international trips to the same destination
totaling approximately $19,000 each. DBM management advised it did not
follow up with the State agencies since documentation was not submitted for
its review and approval.
 DBM did not monitor domestic travel and therefore did not identify and
follow up when agencies used business class for domestic flights which is
prohibited by travel regulations. Specifically, our review of four domestic
business-class tickets totaling $5,700 purchased by agencies through the State
travel vendor disclosed that DBM did not identify the improper use of
business class or follow up with the agencies.
State travel regulations require DBM to approve international travel request forms
prepared by State agencies. The regulations also require the use of the lowest
logical fare available, prohibit first and business-class travel on domestic trips,
and require written justification and approval of first-class travel on international
trips. Since DBM is responsible for the State’s travel management program, it
should monitor the travel activity and follow up when agencies do not submit
documentation for review and approval of international flights, or do not use
economy class travel for domestic flights to control the State’s cost related to
travel.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DBM monitor State travel activity and
a. review and approve all international travel, as required; and
b. follow up when State agencies use prohibited travel for domestic flights,
including those noted above.
7 Test items were selected based on travel class and costs from fiscal year 2025 flight bookings. A
flight booking for an indirect flight could include both first-class and business/economy tickets.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) for the period beginning January
16, 2022 and ending September 30, 2025.
Office of the Secretary (including the Central Collection Unit)
Office of Budget Analysis
Office of Capital Budgeting
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DBM’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, collection practices, accounts
receivable, procurement and disbursement activity, vehicle fleet management, and
travel management. Our audit included DBM’s administration of the Cigarette
Restitution Fund and State Reserve Fund that consisted of the Dedicated Purpose
Account, the Revenue Stabilization Account, the Economic Development
Opportunities Program Fund, the Catastrophic Event Fund, and information
systems security and control. Our audit also included certain support services
(such as maintenance of certain accounting records) provided by DBM to the
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB). We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DBM by OPSB.
These support services (such as payroll and certain contract monitoring) are
included within the scope of our audit of OPSB. In addition, our audit did not
assess DBM’s responsibilities for the preparation and monitoring of the State’s
annual operating and capital budgets since it is covered by executive privilege in
accordance with State regulations and an Attorney General’s opinion.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 16, 2022 to September 30, 2025, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DBM’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data), as well as
from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
(credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit.
We also extracted data from DBM’s debt management system in order to perform
certain tests related to cash receipts and accounts receivable, including collection
practices. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DBM’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
14

--- Page 17 ---
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DBM, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DBM’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DBM that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that certain findings in this report
fall under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
15

--- Page 18 ---
communicated to DBM and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
DBM’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise DBM regarding the results of our review of its
response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
APPENDIX
September 8, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tannen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards, Suite 400
315 West Camden Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) has reviewed your draft audit report on the DBM –
Office of the Secretary and Other Units for the period beginning January 16, 2022 and ending
September 30, 2025. As requested, attached are our responses to the findings in the report.
On behalf of Agency management, we would like to thank you and your audit team for your
professionalism and courtesy throughout the engagement. If you have any questions or need additional
information, you may contact Marc Nicole at 410-260-7288 or Joan Peacock, Director of the Audit and
Finance Compliance Unit, at 410-260-7079.
Sincerely,
Yaakov “Jake” Weissmann
Secretary
cc: Marc Nicole, Deputy Secretary, DBM
Anthony Fugett, Director, Central Collection Unit, DBM
Christina Perrotti, Director, Office of Capital Budgeting, DBM
Nathan Bowen, Director, Office of Budget Analysis, DBM
Katie Malague, COO/CFO, DBM
Joseph Consoli, Director, State Fleet and Travel Management, DBM
Clifton Gray, Assistant Attorney General, DBM
Derek Rost, Chief Information Officer, DBM
Elisabeth Sachs, Director, Government Modernization, Office of Governor Wes Moore
Joan Peacock Director, Audit and Finance Compliance Unit, DBM
45 Calvert Street ∙Annapolis, MD 21401-1907
Tel: 410-260-7041 ∙Fax: 410-974-2585∙Toll Free: 1-800-705-3493∙TTY Users: Call via Maryland Relay
http://dbm.maryland.gov

--- Page 20 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
Central Collection Unit
Finding 1
CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments from debtors it identified
through quarterly matches of its accounts with State wage data.
We recommend that DBM
a. take appropriate action to pursue potential wage garnishments from
debtors and document its efforts (repeat); and
b. review debtor accounts missing the aforementioned designation to
determine the correct status of the account, update the status as needed,
and take any other needed follow-up action (such as pursuing wage
garnishments).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide Establishing a wage garnishment related to a debtor requires various
additional comments as administrative and legal steps that could take up to two years to
deemed necessary. complete, with no guarantee that any actual debtor’s wages will be
collected. As such, CCU established criteria to prioritize accounts
pursued to make best use of CCU resources, including enabling CCU
staff to focus efforts on certain alternative methods of debt collection,
such as the tax intercept process, that are quicker and more effective in
recovering state funds. Nonetheless, with assistance from a new
collection system implemented, DBM has automated several steps of the
wage garnishment process, making it easier and more efficient for CCU
to prioritize pursuing wage garnishments on accounts.
The wage garnishment process starts with sending a required warning
letter and requires CCU to obtain a legal judgment against the debtor
prior to filing the garnishment order. CCU cannot garnish an individual
simply by obtaining wage data. The judgment process is expensive and,
historically, has been manually intensive.
Furthermore, filing a judgment does not guarantee a wage garnishment,
often because the debtor lacks available wages, eliminating the ability of
Page 1 of 13

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
CCU to pursue wage garnishment after the judgement has been filed.
Even when garnishments are successfully established, CCU recovers
only a fraction of the outstanding debt.
Because alternative collection methods yield a significantly higher return
on invested resources, CCU has implemented strategic measures—such
as prioritizing specific debtor accounts for judgments and
garnishments—to allocate its resources effectively and maximize overall
collections. Many challenges in the past, mainly due to the fully manual
process in place to accomplish all steps of the wage garnishment
process, prevented CCU from being successful in fully implementing
corrective actions to resolve this issue. With the replacement of the
legacy collection system during the past audit period, CCU has been able
to automate a portion of the steps involved which enable the effective
prioritization of accounts to be worked.
It is CCU’s goal to continue focusing on increasing the number of
judgments obtained per year by filing on the most appropriate debt and
following through with garnishment where applicable.
Explanation on Results of OLA Test Items
It is of value to note that CCU has justification for the majority of the 15
accounts tested by OLA. Below are explanations for 12 of the 15
accounts. These explanations, along with supporting documentation,
were shared with OLA during fieldwork.
● 6 of the 15 accounts tested were not pursued for wage
garnishment because they did not meet the CCU established
criteria for filing a judgment, which is set for when a debtor has
monthly wages of at least $3500 as mentioned below in the
Clarification of CCU Policy for Wage Garnishments.
● 5 of 15 accounts related to accounts that CCU did not pursue due
to challenges with obtaining documentation from the agency that
referred the debt. Per State regulations (COMAR 17.01.01.04),
State agencies are required to retain the documentation to support
the debts referred to CCU. Judgement cannot be filed unless
there is sufficient documentation to support the delinquent debt.
CCU has been actively working with the related agency to
Page 2 of 13

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
develop a corrective action plan to enable CCU to move forward
with collections on applicable accounts.
● One of the 15 accounts was not pursued for wage garnishment
because CCU did not have a valid address for the debtor which is
a requirement to file judgment. CCU has tools to research
addresses but has not been successful in finding a valid address
for this debtor.
As OLA mentions, the remaining three accounts tested omitted an
indicator that a suit warning letter was sent to the debtor due to a coding
error caused by a system transition under the prior administration.
Clarification on CCU Policy for Pursuing Wage Garnishments
OLA has indicated that CCU’s debt collection policies provide that it
will pursue wage garnishments on accounts with debts greater than $750
that are not making payments if the debtor has monthly wages of at least
$1,200. This is factually inaccurate because it omits the criteria that a
judgement must also be in place on the debtor account before a wage
garnishment can be pursued, and judgements are pursued only if the
debtor has monthly wages of at least $3,500. This information,
including the detailed steps below, was discussed with OLA during
fieldwork. DBM also provided copies of the related standard operating
procedures (SOPs) relevant to each step in the wage garnishment
process. As noted to the auditors, the SOP for each step acknowledges
that the prior step must have been completed before actions can be taken
on the next step. As steps in the process are completed, the account
includes an indicator to acknowledge this. Given this inaccuracy, the
true amount of eligible debts that met the criteria for CCU to pursue for
wage garnishments for the time period noted by OLA is significantly
lower than the $240.8 million figure OLA cited in the finding. OLA was
unable to share the details behind the numbers reported in the finding
analysis for CCU to validate or conduct a comparison.
The steps required to pursue a wage garnishment on a debtor account
include the following:
1. Send a Warning Letter to the debtor
2. Draft and file suit, resulting in a judgement related to a debtor’s
account
Page 3 of 13

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
3. File the wage garnishment
Each of these steps involved multiple processes and had set criteria that
were established by CCU and set based on which accounts have the best
rate of collection and would be considered the best value to work, given
the amount of CCU resources and related costs involved. The criteria to
pursue a wage garnishment (i.e., sending a warning letter to the debtor
and then filing a judgement) is set for accounts with debts greater than
$750 that are not making payments if the debtor has monthly wages of at
least $3,500. This is significant because when looking at OLA’s test of
15 accounts cited in the audit report, it is important to note that 6 of the
15 accounts (40 percent) tested were not pursued for wage garnishment
because they did not meet the CCU established criteria as noted above.
Filing a judgement on an account is by far the most resource intensive
and costly part of the entire wage garnishment process. CCU’s policy of
establishing the appropriate criteria for prioritizing accounts to pursue
for wage garnishments is set, first, by establishing a criteria that
judgement will be filed for debtors that have at least $3500 in monthly
wages as CCU developed criteria where they have the best chance of
being able to collect through wage garnishments given how resource
intensive it is to pursue a judgement.
CCU set a lower dollar amount for pursuing establishment of the actual
wage garnishment of at least $1200 in monthly wages in the attempts to
increase the amount of wage garnishments filed (in relation to the
number of accounts we have with processed judgements). Ultimately,
the higher criteria for the filing of judgements reflect the more labor-
intensive process involved in filing a judgement vs in filing wage
garnishment. Having a judgement on an account is a criteria or
requirement in order to establish and file a wage garnishment. Thus,
when looking at debtor accounts that could possibly have been subject to
a wage garnishment, one must consider the requirement that the debtor
must have monthly wages of at least $3500 if a judgement has not yet
been filed related to that debtor’s account.
Page 4 of 13

--- Page 24 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2027
Please provide details of Agree. We are reviewing this process and the option of adding
corrective action or additional resources to pursue more potential wage garnishments. We
explain disagreement. also continue to evaluate our criteria for selecting accounts for suits and
wage garnishments, to ensure we recognize the appropriate level that
CCU should be pursuing judgements and wage garnishments,
recognizing that pursuing wage garnishments for all outstanding debtor
accounts with wages is not an effective allocation of State resources.
Action taken will be documented and retained for future reference.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Agree. This item refers to a missing initial notice tag, related to
corrective action or accounts that had been transferred from CCU’s legacy system, that
explain disagreement. excluded otherwise eligible debts from the suit drafting and wage
garnishment process. This item was immediately corrected in March
2026, when it was brought to our attention. These accounts are currently
being pursued for wage garnishments, in accordance with CCU Policy.
Auditor’s Comment: While DBM agrees with the recommendations, it notes
that our analysis is factually inaccurate. Specifically, for 6 of the items it
indicated that the CCU debt collection policies include criteria that judgments are
pursued only if the debtor has monthly wages of at least $3,500. This statement
contradicts what we were directly advised of by CCU management in writing
during the fieldwork and in written correspondence subsequent to fieldwork.
Assertions made regarding these 6 test items were previously discussed with CCU
management, who subsequently concurred with the test results.
For 5 other test items, CCU stated that it did not pursue these accounts because of
challenges obtaining documentation from the agency that referred the debt.
However, CCU did not provide documentation supporting this explanation.
Furthermore, it indicated that additional efforts would be made to work with the
related agency to pursue collection such as obtaining sufficient documentation.
Our finding is due to these efforts not taking place during the audit period. We
continue to believe that the analysis is accurate and considering that accounts
from this agency represented a significant portion of outstanding debt, the
recommendation is valid based on the information provided by DBM at the time
of our review.
Page 5 of 13

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
CCU did not always pursue all available collection actions when debtors with
uninsured motorist penalty fees defaulted on payment plans.
We recommend that DBM pursue available collection actions when debtors
default on uninsured motorist penalty fee payment plans.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually inaccurate
Please provide OLA’s analysis states that “CCU did not always pursue available
additional comments as collection action when debtors with uninsured motorist penalty fees
deemed necessary. defaulted on payment plans.” This language is misleading as it does not
clearly indicate the more accurate following actions taken by CCU.
CCU immediately pursues all other collection efforts, besides filing
judgment and wage garnishment, on these debts when debtors with
uninsured motorist penalty fees defaulted on payment plans. As such, no
significant deficiency identified in OLA’s analysis separates it from
Finding 1 and should not be a standalone finding.
OLA Verification of the 60% resolution on defaulted plans
DBM is concerned with OLA’s statement: “We did not attempt to verify
the 60 percent resolution rate and as noted above, we identified plans
that were defaulted for significantly longer than two years that were not
subject to all available collection actions.” CCU provided
documentation including the individual account details showing that
over 60% of defaulted payment plan debts were satisfied after two years.
We still question why OLA continues to make this statement. We
provided this report in March (during fieldwork) and, at that time,
requested a response from OLA on whether this was sufficient. (We did
not hear back.) Additionally, we met on July 24 to discuss the (same)
report in detail and again asked if any additional information was needed
for OLA to feel comfortable with the data and evidence supporting that
over 60% of broken payment plan accounts are satisfied or resolved
within two years. OLA provided no indication that the report was
insufficient or that additional information was needed in order for OLA
to be able to verify the 60 percent resolution rate. Note: the fact that
some plans remained outstanding past the 2-year period does not
Page 6 of 13

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
question the 60% resolution rate. With a 60% resolution rate, some
accounts will still be outstanding past the 2 years noted.
Inaccurate Statements in the Finding Analysis
The following sentence has some inaccuracies: “For example, CCU did
not send warning letters or pursue collection of 8 payment plans that had
defaulted for between 4 and 40 months as of February 2026, with related
balances totaling $72,100. The remaining two payment plans had
warning letters sent to debtors." While not a hardcopy warning letter,
we share that CCU sent a Default Notice via email for an additional
account. Since this is an automated action, we shared a screenshot of the
individual's account as verification the email was sent.
Additionally, OLA states that “CCU management advised that it did not
pursue collection on the defaulted accounts because of the resources it
would take to pursue collection and it relies on the MVA administrative
action to address the issue.” This statement is inaccurate as it implies
that CCU is stating or has acknowledged that no collection efforts were
taken on these defaulted accounts. As previously stated, these accounts
would all be subject to normal collection actions, such as its tax intercept
program (TRIP). CCU’s explanation was only related to why CCU had
not evaluated these accounts to pursue for wage garnishments (i.e., suit
drafting), as that is the only collection tool that was not pursued related
to the defaulted accounts.
Finding 2 is an extension of Finding 1
Finally, as the only collection effort not being pursued related to these
accounts was evaluating the accounts and pursuing wage garnishments,
which involves suit drafting and filing of the wage garnishment, this
issue is the same as Finding 1 above. We have suggested to OLA that
this issue be included in Finding 1. While OLA agreed that only the
collection efforts related to pursuing wage garnishments were not taken,
OLA felt the finding was significant enough to warrant a separate report
finding.
Recommendation 2 Partially Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2027
Please provide details of CCU will develop a SOP for these particular types of debt accounts for
corrective action or pursuing judgments and is working on creating a MVA Payment plan
explain disagreement. suit queue for suit drafting. We acknowledge that we should start
pursuing judgments (and the related wage garnishments) once accounts
reach the period where the effect of the MVA administrative action is no
longer applicable.
Page 7 of 13

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: While DBM indicates partial agreement with the
recommendation, it notes that our analysis includes several inaccurate and/or
concerning statements but does not contradict any statements in the analysis
which acknowledges that other collection efforts are made on these accounts.
DBM also indicates that documentation was provided to support its reference to
the 60 percent resolution rate for defaulted plans using its current practice. OLA
does not question the accuracy of the 60 percent resolution rate, but merely states
that it was not subject to audit verification. Regardless, this information does not
refute the condition noted in the finding – that CCU did not always pursue all
available collection actions. In addition, DBM notes that for one of the eight
accounts, a screenshot was shared to demonstrate that a default notice was
emailed. However, this information was not shared during fieldwork and the
analysis states that CCU did not send warning letters, which is not being disputed.
As a result, we continue to believe that the analysis is accurate and the related
recommendations are valid.
Page 8 of 13

--- Page 28 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 3 and 4 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DBM’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, DBM’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 9 of 13

--- Page 29 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
Statewide Travel Program
Finding 5
DBM did not monitor international travel by State employees, as required,
and did not follow up when agencies used business class for domestic flights
which is prohibited by travel regulations.
We recommend that DBM monitor State travel activity and
a. review and approve all international travel, as required; and
b. follow up when State agencies use prohibited travel for domestic flights,
including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide OLA’s finding asserts that “DBM did not monitor international travel
additional comments as booked through the State’s travel vendor resulting in the failure to
deemed necessary. approve 7 international flights totaling $65,400, including 5 first-class
tickets totaling $26,900.” DBM is required to approve out-of-country
travel; however, the process relies on and requires agency travel
coordinators to submit international travel requests in advance to request
DBM’s approval. As noted further below, any monitoring DBM is able
to implement is after such bookings have occurred. Thus, it is inaccurate
to state that DBM failed to approve international flights due to lack of
monitoring such travel booked through the State’s travel vendor.1
Additionally, the claim that DBM failed to monitor international travel
arranged by State agencies is incorrect. DBM informed OLA regarding
one of the audit test items that it had proactively sought to notify and
remind the agency of travel regulations, as well as the requirement to
submit forms for DBM approval prior to reserving international flights.
1
Although the “finding block” notes that “DBM did not monitor international travel,” both the finding
analysis and recommendation improperly focus on DBM approving international flights. Additionally,
OLA’s original concern (as noted in the Discussion Notes) was regarding DBM not approving agency-
booked first-class travel. This was adjusted following the Exit Meeting when it was clarified that DBM
approval is not required for first-class travel. Our understanding was that the revised issue would reflect
DBM monitoring agency bookings for first-class travel; instead, it was changed to suggest that DBM failed to
grant approval for international flights. Thus, DBM believed it was important to bring this to the reader’s
attention.
Page 10 of 13

--- Page 30 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
When subsequent oversight revealed that the agency repeatedly non-
complied with established travel rules, DBM implemented additional
corrective measures, as detailed below.
Recommendation 5a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of DBM is required to review and approve all international travel; agencies
corrective action or are required to submit these requests to DBM in advance. DBM
explain disagreement. periodically has reminded agencies of these processes. Additionally, and
more recently, the Governor’s Office issued out-of-country policy and
procedures to all cabinet agencies on April 29, 2026, providing further
clarification of this process, and DBM previously provided training
sessions for agency travel coordinators that reinforced these guidelines.
DBM’s ability to monitor international travel bookings can only be done
after the fact. Although DBM could use reports provided by our vendor
to identify when agencies have taken actions that are not in compliance
with regulations, this would not allow DBM the opportunity to provide
required approvals, as OLA indicates in its analysis. In essence, DBM
would not be able to approve such travel. Additionally, once travel is
booked, it is very difficult to refund or exchange, especially without
incurring cancellation or rebooking fees.
If agencies neglect to adhere to the requirement to seek DBM’s approval
for international travel, DBM’s ability to properly monitor this travel is
currently limited. The burden of submitting requests for international
travel to DBM rests on the agencies.
While DBM did not have an established process to specifically monitor
international travel booked by State agencies, it is important to note that
DBM’s general monitoring of the overall travel program identified an
agency that was planning international travel in 2025. DBM reached out
to that agency to remind them of the travel regulations that required
them to submit the appropriate forms to DBM to obtain approval for the
upcoming international trip. agency noncompliance. The agency did not
submit the required forms needed for approval and simply booked the
travel. In 2025, DBM identified and noted this agency consistently did
not comply with the requirement to request DBM’s approval for
Page 11 of 13

--- Page 31 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
international travel in advance; this agency accounts for six of the seven
flights OLA cited. DBM addressed this issue with the agency directly
and distributed communications to all agency travel coordinators
reminding them of the international travel approval process.
The new travel management system, anticipated to roll out in early 2027,
will allow DBM to establish greater limitations on international
bookings, including requiring documentation of DBM’s approval to
proceed with a booking.
Recommendation 5b Partially Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2027
Please provide details of OLA asserts that “DBM did not monitor domestic travel and therefore
corrective action or did not identify and follow up when agencies used business class for
explain disagreement. domestic flights which is prohibited by travel regulations.” State
regulations identify unit heads as responsible for ensuring compliance
with State travel regulations by providing internal control over employee
travel. Specifically, unit heads shall “designate an existing employee or
employees to serve in a subsidiary capacity as an agency travel
coordinator or coordinators within their organization for the purpose of
monitoring employee compliance with these (State) regulations and
performing other duties listed in Regulation .06.” Regulation .06 dictates
that agency travel coordinators “shall be responsible for monitoring
employee compliance in accordance with this chapter.”
DBM’s responsibilities to monitor the overall travel management
program include fiscal management, procurements, functionality,
statewide training, vendor management, and employee/traveler
mediation. In each of these, DBM acts as a monitor to maintain program
viability.
While DBM could enhance its monitoring efforts by reviewing reports
of travel booked to identify agency noncompliance with travel
regulations, identifying agency actions that do not comply with
guidelines after the fact does not prevent those actions. OLA’s finding
seems to recognize the limitations in this approach by noting that DBM
should “follow up when agencies… do not use economy class travel for
domestic flights to control the State’s cost related to travel.” Ticket
purchases happen at the agency level, when a travel coordinator books
Page 12 of 13

--- Page 32 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
September 2026
Agency Response Form
travel. The best way to avoid State use of domestic business class travel
and control State costs is to prevent the initial ticket purchase, which
requires agency heads and travel coordinators to strengthen their internal
controls over travel planning.
The new travel management system, anticipated to roll out in early 2027,
will enable DBM to require documentation to proceed with certain
bookings, including those that necessitate agency head approval.
Auditor’s Comment: While DBM’s response indicates disagreement with
Recommendation 5a and notes several factual inaccuracies, the comments do not
contradict our analysis. Specifically, DBM states that the analysis is factually
inaccurate because any monitoring DBM is able to implement is after travel
bookings have occurred. However, given that DBM is responsible for the State’s
travel management program, it should monitor travel activity to ensure all travel
is approved as required and take timely corrective follow-up action. DBM further
states that it informed OLA regarding its monitoring efforts over one agency that
accounted for numerous test items noted in the analysis, however the only
documented follow up provided was one notice sent to all agencies in November
2025 reminding them of the requirements but the travel for the example cited in
the finding occurred in March and July 2025.
Nevertheless, DBM agrees that it could use reports provided by the travel vendor
to identify when agencies have taken actions that are not in compliance with
regulations. DBM also states that a new travel management system, anticipated to
roll out in early 2027, will allow DBM to establish greater limitations on
international bookings, including requiring documentation of DBM’s approval to
proceed with a booking. Accordingly, we continue to believe the analysis is
accurate and recommendations are valid.
Page 13 of 13

--- Page 33 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Matthew P. Henry
Kareem R. Jackson
Ryan S. Krogen, CFE, CIA
Jonathan D. Souders
Staff Auditors
Matthew K. Gonglewski
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors