Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Date: 2026-09-28
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6abd61b175432e81996d38e4
Extracted: 2026-10-05T11:20:14.684803
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
September 2026
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 28, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) for the period
beginning September 16, 2021 and ending November 30, 2025. UMES is a
comprehensive public institution offering an array of baccalaureate programs in
both traditional arts and sciences, and in applied professional fields, as well as
select professionally oriented master’s and doctoral programs.
Our audit disclosed that UMES circumvented competitive procurement,
publication, and oversight requirements when it purchased heating, ventilation,
and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment totaling $1.3 million. Specifically,
UMES used an existing contract for HVAC repair to purchase the equipment
without a competitive procurement process and publication of the solicitation and
award.
Our audit also disclosed that UMES did not ensure its food service vendor
submitted the monthly sales commission as required by the contract. This
condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to
January 2019 but was not sufficiently corrected. During calendar years 2022
through 2025, the vendor reported food sales of approximately $3.4 million with
related commissions totaling $688,000.
Our audit further noted that UMES used its Corporate Purchasing Travel Cards
(CPTC) to purchase non-travel related goods and services, such as facility
renovations, circumventing USM procurement requirements and did not pay
certain CPTC invoices timely resulting in late payment fees totaling $22,000.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit further disclosed that UMES did not ensure that faculty responsible for
grants submitted required conflict of interest statements and did not always
request grant reimbursements timely. UMES also did not have a procedure to
verify the accuracy of overtime rates on its automated system resulting in at least
9 employees being overpaid $34,388 for overtime. For example, during the week
ending November 1, 2025, one employee was paid an overtime hourly rate of
$596 rather than $67 resulting in an overpayment of $19,054 for 32 hours of
overtime.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
UMES’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of UMES’ response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding. In accordance with State law, we
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations and will notify UMES of any needed clarification to ensure
the responses sufficiently address the related findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
UMES.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) 8
circumvented competitive procurement and publication requirements
when it purchased heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
equipment totaling $1.3 million.
* Finding 2 – UMES did not adequately monitor its food service vendor 8
to ensure proper commissions were received.
Corporate Purchasing Travel Cards
Finding 3 – UMES used its Corporate Purchasing Travel Cards (CPTC) 9
to purchase non-travel related goods and services circumventing
University System of Maryland procurement requirements and did not
pay certain CPTC invoices timely resulting in late payment fees totaling
$22,000.
Research Grants and Contracts
Finding 4 – UMES did not ensure that faculty responsible for research 10
grants submitted required conflict of interest statements and did not
always request grant reimbursements timely.
Payroll
Finding 5 – UMES did not verify the propriety of overtime rates on its 11
automated system resulting in at least 9 employees being overpaid at
least $34,388.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 12
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) is a comprehensive public
institution of the University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the
jurisdiction of USM’s Board of Regents. UMES offers an array of baccalaureate
programs in both traditional arts and sciences, and in applied professional fields,
as well as select professionally oriented master’s and doctoral programs. Student
enrollment for the fall 2025 semester totaled 3,361, including 2,682
undergraduate students and 679 graduate students.
The UMES budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees
and a State General Fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal
grants and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, UMES’
revenues for fiscal year 2025 totaled approximately $195 million (see Figure 1),
which included a State General Fund appropriation of approximately $69.9
million. During the period from June 30, 2022 through June 30, 2025, UMES had
vacancy rates that ranged from 13.8 percent to 19.3 percent. As of June 30, 2025,
13.8 percent of the total 840 positions were vacant. These vacancies may have
contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
UMES Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 724
Vacant 116
Total 840
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $108,727,678
Technical and Special Fees 760,749
Operating Expenses 85,491,639
Total $194,980,066
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Sources
Funding
Unrestricted
General Fund $ 69,944,949
Tuition and Fees 30,745,019
Other University Revenues1 48,305,617
148,995,585
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 34,263,377
Other Gifts, Grants, and Contracts 11,721,104
45,984,481
Total $194,980,066
Source: State and UMES financial records and UMES personnel records
1 Includes revenue from Auxiliary Services ($26.7 million), Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Settlement ($9.0 million), and from the Higher Education Investment Fund ($4.5
million).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated December 15, 2022. See Figure 2 for the
results of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
UMES did not adequately monitor its food service vendor to
Repeated
Finding 1 ensure required facility upgrades, investments, and
(Current Finding 2)
commissions were received.
UMES had not established sufficient controls over student
Finding 2 residency determinations and subsequent changes, and Not Repeated
certain non-cash credits recorded in student accounts.
UMES did not adequately control and account for mail
Finding 3 collections, and did not ensure electronic collections were Not Repeated
properly deposited into the State’s bank account.
Finding 4 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 5 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
Finding 6 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.2 Status Redacted2
2 The finding description as well as the implementation status of this cybersecurity–related finding
has been redacted from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2- 1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) circumvented
competitive procurement and publication requirements when it purchased
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment totaling $1.3
million.
Analysis
UMES circumvented competitive procurement and publication requirements
when it purchased HVAC equipment totaling approximately $1.3 million. Our
test of 15 payments3 from fiscal years 2023 to 2026 totaling $7.7 million,
disclosed that one payment totaling $736,000 for the purchase of HVAC
equipment was not included within the scope of the related contract. Specifically,
UMES used an existing contract for HVAC repair to purchase the equipment
without a competitive procurement process and publication of the solicitation and
award. According to UMES records, the vendor was paid an additional $550,000
(for a total of approximately $1.3 million) for HVAC equipment during the period
from February 2024 to September 2024.
As a result, there is a lack of assurance that UMES obtained the most favorable
pricing for the equipment. University System of Maryland’s (USM) Procurement
Policies and Procedures requires formal solicitation and competition for
procurements greater than $200,000 as well as publishing the solicitation and
award, such as on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMES ensure all procurements adhere to USM policy
including competitive bidding and publication requirements.
Finding 2
UMES did not adequately monitor its food service vendor to ensure proper
commissions were received.
Analysis
UMES did not ensure its food service vendor submitted the monthly sales
commission (20 percent of food sales) as required by the contract. During
3 Test items were selected based on materiality.
8

--- Page 11 ---
calendar years 2022 through 2025, the vendor reported food sales of
approximately $3,442,000 with related commissions totaling $688,000. Our
review disclosed that UMES only verified commissions for July 2022 through
November 2023 and January 2025 through May 2025, which accounted for
commissions totaling $332,000. Our test of commissions received for the period
of December 2024 through November 2025 did not identify any discrepancies in
the amounts remitted.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to January 2019. In its response to our prior report, UMES stated that
by August 31, 2022, it would verify food service sales to ensure the proper
commission is remitted. UMES was unable to explain why the corrective action
was not implemented.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMES verify reported food service sales and ensure
that the proper commissions are remitted (repeat).
Corporate Purchasing Travel Cards
Finding 3
UMES used its Corporate Purchasing Travel Cards (CPTC) to purchase
non-travel related goods and services circumventing USM procurement
requirements and did not pay certain CPTC invoices timely resulting in late
payment fees totaling $22,000.
Analysis
UMES used its CPTCs to purchase non-travel related goods and services
circumventing USM procurement requirements and did not pay certain CPTC
invoices timely. According to State records, CPTC charges during the period
from July 2023 through December 2025 totaled approximately $5.8 million.
Our test of 13 CPTC charges totaling $276,0004 made during the period from July
2024 through November 2025 disclosed 9 charges totaling $234,000 that were for
non-travel related purchases such as facility renovations and homecoming
activities. These purchases were made at the direction of a management
employee which we were advised was done to expedite the procurement process.
The use of the CPTC for these purchases violated UMES Travel Procedures
4 Test items were selected based on the purchase category and whether it appeared to be travel-
related.
9

--- Page 12 ---
which limits the use of CPTCs to legitimate travel expenses. In addition, the use
of the card circumvented USM purchase approval requirements and in one
instance circumvented competitive procurement and publication requirements.
Furthermore. UMES did not pay CPTC invoices timely. Specifically, during the
period from July 2023 through January 2025 UMES paid late payment fees
totaling $22,000 on six invoices that were not paid timely. We were advised by
UMES management that the delays in paying these invoices were primarily due to
the implementation of its new financial system.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMES
a. comply with UMES CPTC policy and only use CPTC for travel-related
expenditures, and
b. ensure that CPTC invoices are paid timely to avoid late fees.
Research Grants and Contracts
Finding 4
UMES did not ensure that faculty responsible for research grants submitted
required conflict of interest (COI) statements and did not always request
grant reimbursements timely.
Analysis
UMES did not ensure that faculty responsible for research grants submitted the
required COI statements and did not always request grant reimbursements timely.
According to UMES’ records, there were 214 open research grants and
agreements as of January 2026 with awards totaling approximately $116 million.
• Our test of 11 awards5 from fiscal years 2023, 2025 and 2026 totaling $15.1
million disclosed that the required COI statement was not completed for 3
awards totaling $6.2 million. Faculty responsible for research projects funded
by these grants will often collaborate with individuals and/or entities with
whom the faculty has a relationship, which may be considered a conflict of
interest. UMES’ Policy on Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment in
Research requires faculty to complete a COI statement prior to submission of
any proposal for research grant activity. Subsequent to our inquiries, UMES
obtained the three COI statements which did not report any conflicts.
5 Test items were selected based on the materiality of the awards.
10

--- Page 13 ---
• Our test of five awards during fiscal years 2025 and 2026 totaling $5.5
million6 disclosed that UMES did not invoice or drawdown funds timely. For
example, for three of these awards, UMES did not invoice the grantors a total
of $925,000 until we inquired about the billings, 93 to 277 days after the funds
could have been requested. The grant agreements provide that
reimbursements can be submitted after certain milestones, such as grant
execution, either through invoicing the grantor or drawing down the funds
directly from the grantor.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMES ensure
a. COI statements are submitted as required by its policy, and
b. grant reimbursements are recovered timely.
Payroll
Finding 5
UMES did not verify the propriety of overtime rates on its automated system
resulting in at least 9 employees being overpaid at least $34,388.
Analysis
UMES did not verify the propriety of overtime rates on its automated system
resulting in at least 9 employees being overpaid at least $34,388. UMES started
using an automated system maintained by the University of Maryland, College
Park (UMCP) in November 2024. UMES was responsible for entering employee
timesheets into the system and verifying the accuracy of payroll rates and
calculations, including overtime which totaled approximately $1.1 million during
calendar year 2025. Our review disclosed that UMES did not have a procedure to
verify the accuracy of overtime rates on the system resulting in certain errors
going undetected.
Specifically, our test of overtime payments7 totaling $52,388 to 11 employees
during fiscal years 2025 and 2026 disclosed that payments to 9 employees
included overpayments totaling $34,388 because the hourly rates used were
improper. For example, for the week ending November 1, 2025 one employee
was paid an overtime hourly rate of $596 rather than $67 resulting in an
overpayment of $19,054 for 36 hours of overtime. UMES was not aware of these
errors until we brought the matter to their attention.
6 Test items were selected based on the materiality of the awards.
7 Test items selected based on the materiality of the overtime payments and rates.
11

--- Page 14 ---
In response to our inquiry, UMES contacted UMCP in February 2026 to discuss
the incorrect rates. UMCP advised UMES that it became aware of the issue
(which also impacted other USM institutions) in January 2026 but did not
investigate the issue to determine the cause and extent of the overpayments until
April 2026.8 The investigation concluded that the system was not configured
correctly which resulted in UMES making $40,300 in overpayments and $880 in
underpayments to a total of 240 UMES employees. We were advised by UMES
that it intends on processing payroll adjustments for any improper payments.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure overtime calculations are reviewed prior to payment to ensure
propriety, and
b. in conjunction with UMCP ensure that all overpayments and
underpayments are corrected.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Finding 6 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance
and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with UMES’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
8 Per UMCP personnel, the overpayments impacted other units using this system, but we were
only provided with the investigation for UMES.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) - University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) for the period
beginning September 16, 2021 and ending November 30, 2025. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMES’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, student financial aid, payroll, corporate
purchasing cards, sponsored programs, and information systems security and
control. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMES by the USM
Office, such as bond financing, and by the University System of Maryland,
College Park (UMCP), such as processing vendor payment transmittals and
payroll, and capital project management. These support services are included
within the scope of our audits of the USM Office and UMCP, respectively. In
addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over
compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal assistance programs and
an assessment of UMES’ compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including the components of USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of September 16, 2021 to November 30, 2025, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
13

--- Page 16 ---
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UMES’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from UMES’ financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UMES’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UMES, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMES’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMES that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(c), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a certain finding in this report
falls under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report
all specifics as to the nature of this cybersecurity finding and required corrective
actions have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned
practices, and government auditing standards, support the redaction of this
information from the public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity
finding have been communicated to UMES and those parties responsible for
acting on our recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from USM Office, on behalf of UMES, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
15

--- Page 18 ---
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
September 25, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Period of Audit: September 16, 2021 through November 30, 2025
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Eastern Shore. Our comments
refer to the individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Colleen Auburger
Interim Chief Financial Officer
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Heidi Anderson, President, UMES
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, Board of Regents, USM
Mr. Charles T. McMillen, Chair, Board of Regents Committee on Audit, USM
Dr. Jocelyn Elliott, Acting Internal Auditor and Director of Risk Management, UMES
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Ms. Jessica Clark, Interim Vice Chancellor, Internal Audit and Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office

--- Page 20 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) circumvented
competitive procurement and publication requirements when it purchased
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment totaling $1.3
million.
We recommend that UMES ensure all procurements adhere to USM policy
including competitive bidding and publication requirements.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2027
Please provide details of UMES agrees with this finding. UMES Procurement Department has
corrective action or internal policies and procedures consistent with USM Procurement
explain disagreement. Policies and the Chancellor’s Directive issued in March 2025. The
Procurement Department has enhanced its review by incorporating
additional best practices to ensure competitive and reasonable pricing
and that procurement documentation clearly supports the goods and
services that are being acquired. The procurement in question was
completed in accordance with USM Policy at the time; however, we
acknowledge documentation could be improved. We are in the process
of reviewing the structure of the Procurement Office to determine how to
enhance formal review and documentation of procurement documents
with limited staff.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 21 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
UMES did not adequately monitor its food service vendor to ensure proper
commissions were received.
We recommend that UMES verify reported food service sales and ensure
that the proper commissions are remitted (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2025
Please provide details of UMES agrees with this finding. The reconciliation process was
corrective action or implemented in September 2025 and is performed by the Auxiliary
explain disagreement. Accountant (AA). Upon receipt of the food service vendor’s
period/monthly summary and calculated commission check, the check is
immediately forwarded to the Auxiliary Cashier for receipt. The AA
reconciles the vendor’s summary to period reports from the One Card
system, verifying that all invoices are included, and documents any
discrepancies, which are communicated to the vendor and the Director of
Auxiliary. After the reconciliation is completed, the Director of
Auxiliary reviews, signs, and dates the reconciliation to indicate
approval. The AA also updates the vendor’s summary sheet with the
applicable period, amount, date the check was received, and the internal
accounting system receipt number.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 22 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Corporate Purchasing Travel Cards
Finding 3
UMES used its Corporate Purchasing Travel Cards (CPTC) to purchase
non-travel related goods and services circumventing USM procurement
requirements and did not pay certain CPTC invoices timely resulting in late
payment fees totaling $22,000.
We recommend that UMES
a. comply with UMES CPTC policy and only use CPTC for travel-related
expenditures, and
b. ensure that CPTC invoices are paid timely to avoid late fees.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2026
Please provide details of UMES agrees with this finding.
corrective action or During the audit period, certain non-travel purchases were processed
explain disagreement. using the Corporate Purchasing Travel Card (CPTC)
to expedite procurement as requested by Administration due to the
nature and timing of purchase. UMES recognizes that this practice was
inconsistent with University policy governing CPTC use and did not
align with applicable USM procurement requirements.
Corrective actions have been implemented to ensure the CPTC is used
for authorized travel-related expenditures. The University is in the
process of reinforcing cardholders and approver responsibilities,
communicating allowable uses of the CPTC to all cardholders, and
providing updated policies and procedures of the card usage.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2026
Please provide details of UMES agrees with this finding. UMES acknowledges that delays in
corrective action or processing certain CPTC invoices resulted in late payment fees. The
explain disagreement. delays primarily occurred during the implementation and transition to
the University's new financial system, as staff worked through the
learning curve associated with the new invoice processing and payment
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 23 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
procedures. Since that time, Our Administration and
Finance Accountant has strengthened invoice tracking and payment
processes and is working diligently to help ensure CPTC invoices are
processed and paid by their due dates, thereby avoiding future late
payment fees.
Beginning in November 2024, CPTC invoices have been processed and
paid through the accounting system. During the initial implementation
of new accounting system, late fees were incurred due to the lack of
knowledge of how we were to remit the payment. Since then, the team
has established and consistently followed the appropriate Ad
Hoc payment process for CPTC invoices, ensuring payments are
processed in a timely manner and preventing further delays.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 24 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Research Grants and Contracts
Finding 4
UMES did not ensure that faculty responsible for research grants submitted
required conflict of interest (COI) statements and did not always request
grant reimbursements timely.
We recommend that UMES ensure
a. COI statements are submitted as required by its policy, and
b. grant reimbursements are recovered timely.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The University provided the requested information and supporting
corrective action or documentation for each of the identified awards. Additionally, in
explain disagreement. response to the Office of Legislative Audit's request, we obtained
and submitted the three outstanding COI disclosure forms. All three
disclosures were completed and confirmed that no conflicts of interest
existed for the individuals identified. Moving forward, the University
will ensure all COI forms are received in a timely manner. UMES will
be collecting annual disclosures with the establishment of a new grant
submission process. The Office of Sponsored Research will maintain a
shared folder for all disclosures. No new grant accounts will be
established unless a COI is on file for the Principal Investigator (PI).
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2027
Please provide details of UMES agrees with this finding.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. The delays in billing/invoicing and drawing down grant funds were
primarily attributable to the implementation of the University's new
financial system, which required staff to adapt to new grant billing and
reimbursement processes, as well as insufficient grant accounting
training. These factors contributed to delays
in submitting reimbursement requests for certain awards.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 25 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
This remains an ongoing issue; however, UMES will work closely with
the University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP), and external
consultants to learn more about the system and process issues
contributing to these delays. In addition, UMES is implementing
procedures to improve the timeliness of grant invoicing and drawdowns.
These actions include strengthening the monitoring of grant milestones
and reimbursement deadlines; clarifying the roles and responsibilities of
Principal Investigators and providing them with training; reinforcing
staff responsibilities for billing and drawdown activities; providing
training on applicable grant requirements; and enhancing grant
accountant training on the use of the new financial system and its
reporting capabilities.
The Comptroller will continue to monitor compliance with grant
requirements and the effectiveness of these corrective actions to help
ensure reimbursement requests are submitted timely and in accordance
with grant agreements by June 2027.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 26 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 5
UMES did not verify the propriety of overtime rates on its automated system
resulting in at least 9 employees being overpaid at least $34,388.
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure overtime calculations are reviewed prior to payment to ensure
propriety, and
b. in conjunction with UMCP ensure that all overpayments and
underpayments are corrected.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2027
Please provide details of UMES agrees with this finding. The Associate Director is tasked with
corrective action or reviewing the processes of the Payroll Manager to ensure that the reports
explain disagreement. are being reviewed on a bi-weekly basis during the payroll update
process. Managers and supervisors will be offered additional training as
well as updates via email reminding them of the importance of pre-
authorizing overtime before it is approved on timesheets.
The HR department has implemented corrective actions to strengthen
internal controls over overtime payments by requiring supervisory
review and verification of overtime calculations prior to payment.
Supervisors must ensure that overtime hours recorded on employee
timesheets exactly match the approved Overtime Authorization Forms
before approving payroll. In addition, all Overtime Authorization Forms
must receive supervisory approval and be submitted to the Office of
Human Resources for audit verification. These enhanced review
procedures are intended to ensure the accuracy of overtime calculations
and prevent similar errors from occurring in the future. The
implementation for reviewing the overtime payment form against the
timesheet will begin on October 1, 2026, as we are advertising for new
staff and hope to have them onboard by that date.
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 27 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2027
Please provide details of UMES agrees with this finding. As to the overpayments, per approval
corrective action or from the Vice President of Administration and Finance, any employee
explain disagreement. who had been overpaid above the $250 threshold would repay those
funds. These funds will be recovered via payroll deductions utilizing the
accounting system. The repayment of unearned overtime will be
completed by June 2027.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 28 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Finding 6 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following finding,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with UMES’ responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, UMES’ responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Principal Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Charles O. Price
Malcolm J. Woodard, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Jammie A. Brown
Kevin A. Chavara
Tari J. Covington
Staff Auditors
Evan C. Joneckis
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditors