Title: Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2025, the Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans is now named the Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans.
Date: 2026-09-29
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/ViewReport?fileId=6abfbee9cb5ddb7f1db8b7c8
Extracted: 2026-10-05T11:20:04.960170
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement
Plans
September 2026
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate David H. Moon, Esq.
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty, Esq.
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith, Esq.
Senator Alonzo T. Washington Delegate Ryan S. Spiegel, Esq.
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.maryland.gov
Website: ola.maryland.gov
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 29, 2026
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Employees
Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) for the period beginning May 16, 2022
and ending April 30, 2026. MSRP is responsible for supervising and
administering the State’s voluntary tax sheltered income deferral plans for State
employees and certain employees of local boards of education and municipalities.
Our audit disclosed that MSRP could not document that employee investment
information was accurately migrated from its prior plan administrator’s system to
its new plan administrator’s system. MSRP management advised us that
verifications were done by both MSRP personnel and the new plan administrator.
However, MSRP could not document its verification or that it reviewed the
verification performed by the new plan administrator to ensure it was complete
and accurate. In addition, MSRP did not verify the propriety of the fees charged
by its new plan administrator, which according to the plan administrator’s
records, totaled $1.3 million as of April 2026.
Our audit further disclosed that MSRP did not establish sufficient controls over
disbursements made from the custodial bank account used for investment-related
transactions, a condition noted but not corrected from our prior report. Finally,
MSRP did not obtain support to verify the propriety of amounts invoiced by its
accounting firm and could not readily justify an additional $20,000 paid to the
vendor in excess of the maximum provided for in the contract.

--- Page 4 ---
MSRP’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while MSRP
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response disagree or appear to be inconsistent
with a report finding and recommendation. In each instance we reviewed and
reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included “auditor’s comments” within MSRP’s response to explain our position.
We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding
issues that we cannot resolve with MSRP.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MSRP.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities 4
Financial Statement Audits 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Plan Administration
Finding 1 – The Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans 7
(MSRP) could not document that employee investment information
was accurately migrated from its prior plan administrator to its new
administrator’s system.
Finding 2 – MSRP did not verify the propriety of fees charges by its new 8
plan administrator.
Custodial Bank Account
* Finding 3 – MSRP did not establish sufficient controls over disbursements 8
made from the custodial bank account used for investment-related
transactions.
Audit Services
Finding 4 – MSRP did not obtain support to verify the propriety of 9
amounts invoiced by its accounting firm and could not readily justify
an additional $20,000 paid to the firm for services that were not
included in the scope of the contract.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 616, Laws of Maryland 2025 effective July 1, 2025, changed the name of
the Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans to
the Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP). In
accordance with State law, the MSRP is administered by a Board of Trustees
consisting of nine members appointed by the Governor. The Board oversees the
State’s three tax sheltered income deferral plans for State employees and one
matching contribution plan for certain participating employees. As noted in
Figure 1, during fiscal year 2025 MSRP expenditures totaled approximately $2.5
million. In accordance with State law, these expenses are paid from the
contributions to the plans or from the income or assets of the plans.
Figure 1
MSRP Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Source
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2025
Positions
Filled 14
Vacant 0
Total 14
Fiscal Year 2025 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages & Fringe Benefits $1,899,962
Operating Expenses 584,435
Total $2,484,397
Fiscal Year 2025 Funding Source
Funding
Special Fund $2,484,397
Total $2,484,397
Source: State financial and personnel records
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Statement Audits
MSRP engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to perform audits
of the plans’ financial statements for calendar years 2022, 2023, and 2024.1 In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that these financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the respective net position of MSRP and the
respective changes in its net position held in trust for deferred compensation
benefits in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
The audited financial statements of the plans indicate that, during calendar year
2024, amounts deferred by employees participating in the Deferred Compensation
Plan, the Tax Sheltered Annuity Plan, and the Savings and Investment Plan
totaled approximately $110.6 million, $2.9 million, and $112.5 million,
respectively. The amount contributed by the State into the Match Plan and Trust
totaled $15 million. These financial statements further indicate that, as of
December 31, 2024, the assets available for plan benefits for the Deferred
Compensation Plan, the Tax Sheltered Annuity Plan, the Savings and Investment
Plan, and the Match Plan and Trust totaled approximately $5.9 billion ($2.6
billion, $128.8 million, $2.9 billion, and $282.2 million, respectively).
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 5, 2023. See Figure 2 for results of
our review.
1 In addition to the financial statement audits, the independent auditor performs agreed upon
procedures related to the administration of the Plans and performs verifications of participant
accounts.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MSRP did not establish sufficient controls over
disbursements made from the bank account used to Repeated
Finding 1
hold certain investments and process related (Current Finding 3)
transactions.
MSRP did not ensure payroll payments processed
by the State’s Central Payroll Bureau were
Finding 2 consistent with the related MSRP time records and Not Repeated
salary information maintained within the Statewide
Personnel System.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Plan Administration
Background
The Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP)
contracted with a new vendor in August 2025 to provide plan administration,
communication, enrollment, transaction processing, and recordkeeping services
for its four defined contribution plans. The contract covered the period from
August 2025 through August 2030, with one two-year renewal option through
August 2032 and had a total contract price of $28 million (including the optional
renewal period).
Finding 1
MSRP could not document that employee investment information was
accurately migrated from its prior plan administrator to its new
administrator’s system.
Analysis
MSRP could not document that employee investment information was accurately
migrated from its prior plan administrator to its new administrator’s system.
Specifically, MSRP management advised us that verifications were done by both
MSRP personnel and the new plan administrator. However, MSRP could not
provide documentation of its verification or that it reviewed the plan administrator
verification to ensure it was complete and accurate.
Both the prior and new plan administrator provided MSRP detailed listings of
account information including balances in each of the 4 defined contribution
plans. Our arbitrary test of 20 of the accounts from 2 of the plans (10 each) did
not identify any discrepancies.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSRP conduct documented verifications that employee
investment information was properly transferred into the plan
administrator’s system, and timely address any discrepancies identified.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 2
MSRP did not verify the propriety of fees charged by its new plan
administrator.
Analysis
MSRP did not verify the propriety of fees charged by its new plan administrator.
The plan administrator is paid through asset-based fees which it calculates and
withdraws directly from the plans’ investment accounts on a monthly basis.2
According to plan administrator records, as of April 2026 the new plan
administrator withdrew $1.3 million in fees.
Our review disclosed that MSRP did not verify that the fees calculated and
withdrawn by the new plan administrator were calculated properly and in
accordance with the contract. We were advised by MSRP management that as of
June 2026, it was working with the plan administrator to obtain documents and
information to perform its verification of the asset-based fee calculation. Our
review of the fee calculations for the eight months from September 2025 through
April 20263 did not identify any inaccuracies.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSRP verify the propriety of the plan administrator’s
fees to ensure they were calculated correctly and in accordance with the
contract.
Custodial Bank Account
Finding 3
MSRP did not establish sufficient controls over disbursements made from
the custodial bank account used for investment-related transactions.
Analysis
MSRP did not establish sufficient controls over disbursements made from the
custodial bank account used for investment-related transactions. MSRP maintains
a custodial bank account that can be accessed by authorized MSRP personnel and
third-party investment managers to make disbursements, such as purchasing
investments. According to bank records, the market value of the account,
2 According to MSRP’s contract with the plan administrator, MSRP may dispute the plan
administrator’s asset-based fee within 5 days of being invoiced.
3 We obtained and reviewed all the new plan administrator’s asset-based calculations from when
the new plan administrator became responsible for the plans (September 2025) through April
2026.
8

--- Page 11 ---
(investments and cash), totaled $764.3 million as of December 31, 2025 and
during calendar year 2025, there were 325 disbursements totaling $70.6 million.
 Two MSRP employees had the ability to direct the bank to make
disbursements without independent review and approval. These employees
also had the ability to modify bank access, such as granting authority to make
disbursement requests. According to bank records, these MSRP employees
did not process any transactions during the audit period.
 MSRP did not verify the propriety of disbursements directed by investment
managers who routinely used the account to purchase and redeem
investments. MSRP management advised us that it did not perform a review
of these disbursements since it relied on the investment managers to perform
their fiduciary duty.
As a result of these conditions, improper disbursements could be made from the
bank account without timely detection. Similar conditions regarding insufficient
controls over disbursements made from the custodial bank account were noted in
our prior audit report. In response to that report, MSRP indicated that by October
2022 it would strengthen internal controls and ensure that banking transactions
were monitored. MSRP could not explain why the recommendations were not
fully implemented.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSRP
a. use available bank records to ensure that all disbursements are subject to
independent review and approval, at least on a test basis (repeat); and
b. remove the ability to modify bank access from employees that can process
transactions (repeat).
Audit Services
Finding 4
MSRP did not obtain support to verify the propriety of amounts invoiced by
its accounting firm and could not readily justify an additional $20,000 paid to
the firm for services that were not included in the scope of the contract.
Analysis
MSRP did not obtain support to verify the propriety of amounts invoiced by its
accounting firm and could not readily justify an additional $20,000 paid to the
firm for services that were not included in the scope of the contract. MSRP
9

--- Page 12 ---
contracted with a public accounting firm in March 2021 for an amount not to
exceed $305,970 to audit the four MSRP investment plans for the five-year period
ending August 2025. According to State records, payments to the firm totaled
$265,695 during our audit period.
Our review disclosed that MSRP did not obtain required supporting documents
(such as timesheets) to verify the propriety of amounts invoiced. The contract
with the firm provided that invoices shall include the employee timesheets or
electronic timekeeping records certified by the firm for actual time worked.
Without this documentation, there is a lack of assurance that amounts invoiced
and paid to the firm were proper.
In addition, our review disclosed that as of April 30, 2026, MSRP had paid the
accounting firm a total of $325,960 ($20,000 more than the maximum allowed by
the contract). MSRP could not readily document the reason for the excess
payments but indicated that approximately $10,000 of the payments related to
additional work outside the scope of the contract. In this regard, MSRP had
consulted with the Department of General Services on how to process these
additional payments and was advised to create a new purchase order, but instead
MSRP charged these costs to the existing contract.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSRP
a. obtain supporting documentation to verify the propriety of billings, as
required in the contract;
b. ensure that contract costs do not exceed the established maximum; and
c. limit payments to activities that are within the scope of the contract.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Employees
Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) for the period beginning May 16, 2022
and ending April 30, 2026. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSRP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included plan administration, purchasing and
disbursements, and payroll. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
MSRP engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to perform audits
of the plans’ financial statements for calendar years 2022, 2023, and 2024. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that these financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the respective net position of MSRP and the
changes in its net position held in trust for deferred compensation benefits in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. This independent certified public accounting firm also performed
certain agreed upon procedures to assist in evaluating the administration of the
plans for calendar years 2022 through 2024. In the related agreed upon
procedures reports, no findings were identified by the firm for the procedures
performed. We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to
provide audit coverage of certain aspects of MSRP’s operations (contributions
from participating employees, asset fee collections, benefits paid). Our audit
procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
11

--- Page 14 ---
period of May 16, 2022 to April 30, 2026, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSRP’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in the
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the
purpose of evaluating certain payroll data. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MSRP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSRP, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSRP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSRP that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MSRP’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MSRP regarding the
results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX
B O A R D O F T R U S T E E S
Executive Director & Board Secretary Chair
Ronda Butler Bell, MPA Hon. T. Eloise Foster
Deputy Executive Director
N& aCkheieifa F Cin. aSnmciiathl O fficer Raquel M. Coombs
Hon. Dereck E. Davis
Director of Member Ser®vices Lynne M. Durbin, Esq.
Tonya M. Toler, CRC , CPM Jaclyn Hartman
Thomas P. Hickey
Scott A. Nicewarner
Zachary D. Shankman, Esq.
September 23, 2026
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Attached is the Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP)
response to the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) fiscal compliance audit report of MSRP for
the period beginning May 16, 2022 and ending April 30, 2026.
We appreciate the time and attention afforded to MSRP by the OLA auditors and the
professional manner in which they conducted this audit.
Very truly yours,
Ronda Butler Bell
Executive Director & Board Secretary
Attachment
cc: The Honorable T. Eloise Foster, Chair, MSRP Board of Trustees
Nakeia C. Smith, Deputy Executive Director & Chief Financial Officer
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
William Donald Schaefer Tower 6 Saint Paul Street, Suite 200
Baltimore, Maryland 21202-1608
410-767-8740 1-800-543-5605 Fax 410-659-0349 msrp.maryland.gov
Plan Administrator, Empower: 1-833-272-0093 mymsrp.com

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
Plan Administration
Finding 1
MSRP could not document that employee investment information was
accurately migrated from its prior plan administrator to its new
administrator’s system.
We recommend that MSRP conduct documented verifications that employee
investment information was properly transferred into the plan
administrator’s system, and timely address any discrepancies identified.
Agency Response
Analysis PARTIALLY FACTUALLY ACCURATE
Please provide During the transition to the new plan administrator contractor,
additional comments as completing reviews and testing to ensure the successful migration of all
deemed necessary. employee investment information was a required task to be performed
by the incoming plan administrator contractor. In accordance with this
requirement, the incoming plan administrator contractor provided MSRP
management with email updates of migration progress which included
confirmation of successful transfer of employee account and investment
information. Additionally, MSRP exercised due diligence by requesting,
reviewing, and internally reconciling the deconversion files received
from the prior plan administrator contractor with the conversion files
received from the successor plan administrator contractor.
MSRP is concerned with the auditor’s phrasing, which suggests both a
lack of verification regarding the accurate migration of employee
investment information to the new plan administrator contractor’s
system and an absence of supporting documentation confirming a
successful migration.
In fact, MSRP provided the auditors with the deconversion and
conversion files -containing multiple layers of employee account detail-
along with written email confirmations of successful migration. MSRP
also provided an explanation of the methodology used to reconcile the
employee balance transfers, which reconciled to the penny. No
discrepancies were identified by the plan administrator contractors,
MSRP, or the auditors.
Page 1 of 10

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1 Partially Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of As noted above, the accuracy and completeness of the MSRP employee
corrective action or account file migration was verified and confirmed, to the penny, by
explain disagreement. MSRP as well as the prior and successor plan administrator contractors.
This plan administrator contractor transition was unprecedented,
representing the first in MSRP history. While MSRP disagrees with this
finding and deems its employee account migration documentation
review and verification process sufficient, the auditor’s recommendation
is understood, and MSRP recognizes that more comprehensive
documentation could have been retained for the verifications it
conducted.
Therefore, going forward, each time MSRP undergoes a subsequent plan
administrator contractor transition:
The Deputy Executive Director & CFO will review and reconcile
the employee account deconversion and conversion files, review
the confirmation emails from the incoming plan administrator
contractor that confirm successful migration of employee account
information, and create a verification record. This verification
record will include confirmation dates, the Deputy Executive
Director & CFO signature(s), and the signature(s) of the
Executive Director, providing documentary evidence of the
review of the prior and successor plan administrator contractors’
actions and the reconciliation of the employee account files.
MSRP will retain this verification record alongside the
deconversion and conversion files.
Auditor’s Comment: MSRP notes that our analysis is partially factually
accurate, however, the ensuing comments do not dispute the factual accuracy of
the finding. Specifically, MSRP’s response notes that it provided OLA with the
deconversion and conversion files along with email confirmations of successful
migration. However, as noted in the analysis, MSRP could not provide
documentation of its verification of the aforementioned files or that it reviewed
the plan administrator’s verification. MSRP’s response acknowledges this when
it subsequently noted that more comprehensive documentation could have been
retained for the verifications it conducted. Accordingly, we continue to believe
our finding is factually accurate based on the information MSRP was able to
provide during and subsequent to our fieldwork.
Page 2 of 10

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MSRP did not verify the propriety of fees charged by its new plan
administrator.
We recommend that MSRP verify the propriety of the plan administrator’s
fees to ensure they were calculated correctly and in accordance with the
contract.
Agency Response
Analysis PARTIALLY FACTUALLY ACCURATE
Please provide While MSRP acknowledges that its review to verify the propriety of fees
additional comments as charged by the new plan administrator contractor was not fully finalized
deemed necessary. during the audit fieldwork, the auditors’ phrasing misleadingly suggests
that no verification efforts were undertaken. Furthermore, the auditors’
reference to “as of June 2026” could easily misinform readers by
implying that MSRP took no prior verification action.
In line with its long-standing asset fee verification process, MSRP was
actively engaged in reviewing the fees of the new plan administrator
contractor, who assumed the services contract in September 2025. MSRP
initiated this fee review in October 2025, just one month following the
initial deduction of the plan administrator contractor asset fees. This
ongoing fee verification effort demonstrates active MSRP oversight;
however, completion of the fee verification process was delayed due to
external circumstances (detailed below) that were completely beyond the
control of MSRP.
Recommendation 2 Partially Agree Completion Date: Complete -
8/13/2026
Please provide details of MSRP disagrees with the auditors’ characterization of MSRP’s efforts,
corrective action or which (as noted above) insinuates that MSRP did not take any action to
explain disagreement. verify plan administrator contractor fees prior to June 2026. MSRP was
not awaiting documentation so that it could begin to perform its plan
administrator contractor fee verification. Rather, MSRP had been in the
process of performing its plan administrator contractor fee verification
30 days after the implementation of the new plan administrator contract
(i.e., October 2025). The plan administrator contractor fee verification
process could not be completed based solely on the information initially
provided.
Page 3 of 10

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
MSRP’s fee reconciliation methodology employs a comprehensive, two-
step approach. Because this was the initial fee verification conducted
with the new plan administrator contractor, implementing the fee
verification process presented unique challenges and required additional
time. The plan administrator contractor has acknowledged that their staff
have made some initial reporting errors and have corrected these errors.
On August 13, 2026, MSRP completed its plan administrator contractor
fee reconciliation process for reports received through April 2026, which
was the period cited in the auditors’ analysis.
Fee reconciliations and reviews to verify the propriety of the plan
administrator contractor’s fees to ensure they were calculated correctly
and in accordance with the contract have been performed timely; MSRP
is up-to-date with the reviews of all fees through August 2026.
Going forward, MSRP will continue to conduct monthly reviews to
verify that the plan administrator contractor’s fees are accurate and
comply with contract terms. These reviews will be documented, and all
corresponding records will be retained for future reference.
Auditor’s Comment: MSRP notes that our analysis is partially factually
accurate, however, the ensuing comments do not dispute the factual accuracy of
the finding. Specifically, MSRP asserts that it had started the monthly plan
administrator fee verification process but acknowledges that it did not complete
these verifications until August 2026 due to various circumstances. Accordingly,
we continue to believe our finding is factually accurate based on the information
MSRP was able to provide during and subsequent to our fieldwork.
Page 4 of 10

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
Custodial Bank Account
Finding 3
MSRP did not establish sufficient controls over disbursements made from
the custodial bank account used for investment-related transactions.
We recommend that MSRP
a. use available bank records to ensure that all disbursements are subject to
independent review and approval, at least on a test basis (repeat); and
b. remove the ability to modify bank access from employees that can process
transactions (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis PARTIALLY FACTUALLY ACCURATE
Please provide The statement made in the auditors’ analysis that “Two MSRP
additional comments as employees had the ability to direct the bank to make disbursements
deemed necessary. without independent review and approval” is significantly misleading.
At no time during the audit period did MSRP employees have the
system access or permissions necessary to initiate disbursements from
the custodial bank account. MSRP is required to approve and direct
payment of the custody and manager fees in the custodial bank account;
however, this approval “to make this disbursement” requires two
signatures, per MSRP policy. Even with its internal policy in place,
MSRP does acknowledge that the custodial bank only required one of
the two MSRP employees to provide written approval to the custodial
bank. Custody and manager fees are the only disbursements MSRP
directs the bank to make, as the bank requires MSRP’s approval to pay
these fees. The custodial bank must have already entered a payee's
account information into its system before disbursements can be directed
by MSRP. MSRP does not have the ability to go into the custodial
banking system and add payee or bank account information. Thus, this
limitation serves as an additional mitigating control to ensure that no
improper disbursements are made from MSRP’s custodial bank account.
The representation made by the auditors in the analysis that MSRP did
not verify the propriety of disbursements directed by the investment
managers is not accurate. MSRP receives monthly and quarterly reports,
from both the investment managers and the custodial bank, that detail all
custodial bank account transactions. These reports are reviewed by
MSRP regularly for discrepancies and anomalies. Additionally, MSRP
Page 5 of 10

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
has read-only permission to login to the custodial bank account in real
time and run reports at any time. These controls help to ensure improper
disbursements are not made from the custodial bank account.
Recommendation 3a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of As noted above, MSRP has an established practice of reviewing all
corrective action or monthly and quarterly reports (from both the investment managers and
explain disagreement. the custodial bank) that show the details of all transactions made in the
custodial bank account. The Deputy Executive Director & CFO and the
Executive Director review and authorize the investment managers’
custody and management fee transactions by reviewing and signing an
authorization document that is faxed to the custodial bank. These
transactions cannot be performed without the custodial bank’s receipt of
the MSRP written authorization.
Per the Annotated Code of Maryland citation provided below,
fiduciaries have broad latitude and discretion. The investment managers
have been designated by the MSRP Board of Trustees as Plan
fiduciaries, per the Investment Manager Agreement with the Board, and
provide an internally-validated report of all MSRP transactions to the
Deputy Executive Director and CFO.
The investment manager for the stable value fund is subject to Section
5.2, “Fiduciary Status,” of its Investment Manager Agreement with the
MSRP Board of Trustees, which requires: “The Manager acknowledges
that it has been designated to serve as a fiduciary of the Plans pursuant
to Section 35-301 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland (“SPP”) with respect to the services it will
provide under this Agreement, and is subject to the standards of care set
forth in SPP § 21-203 with respect to the Plans and in regard to the
services that it will provide under this Agreement in respect to the
Account.”
The fiduciary role, per SPP § 35–301, is as follows:
(a) In this section, “fiduciary” means a person with discretionary
authority or control over:
(1) the management or administration of any of the supplemental
retirement plans; or
(2) the management or disposition of the assets of any of the
supplemental retirement plans.
SPP § 21–204 sets forth the following:
Page 6 of 10

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
(b) The Board of Trustees may:
(1) allocate the responsibilities of the fiduciaries among the
fiduciaries; and
(2) designate any other person to carry out the responsibilities of a
fiduciary.
(c) (1) If the Board of Trustees makes an allocation or designation
to a person under subsection (b) of this section, the Board of Trustees
is not liable for an act or omission of that person in carrying out the
responsibility, except to the extent that the Board of Trustees violates §
21-203 of this subtitle with respect to:
(i) the allocation or designation;
(ii) the establishment or implementation of a procedure to allocate
or designate; or
(iii) the continuance or review of the allocation or designation.
Recommendation 3b Partially Agree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of MSRP employees have never processed disbursements or any other
corrective action or transactions in the custodial banking system. Additionally, the custodial
explain disagreement. bank has confirmed in writing that MSRP employees did not have
system access/permissions to perform disbursements or transactions in
the system but had read-only access to view the accounts and run
reports. A system report and written confirmation of MSRP’s limited
access/permissions issued by the custodial bank were provided to the
auditors and confirm this fact.
The Executive Director and Deputy Executive Director/CFO (who is the
back-up and designated successor to the Executive Director), do not
have the ability to initiate disbursements in the custodial banking
system, as noted above. These two individuals do have read-only access
to the custodial bank account information and the ability to provide
(written) approval of user access to the custodial banking system. This
limited access is needed to perform the oversight review of transactions
made through the custodial bank account, as well as to grant appropriate
access to MSRP’s investment manager team.
As noted above and required by the bank, MSRP employees do approve
and direct payment of the custody and manager fees in the custodial
bank account. MSRP policy requires two signatures for such approval
(although the custodial bank will accept written approval from only one
MSRP representative, as acknowledged above). MSRP’s internal policy
Page 7 of 10

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
serves as a mitigating control to ensure that no improper disbursements
are made by MSRP employees.
Additionally, this matter is now moot. The custodial bank account is in
the process of being closed, and the specific date of closure is pending.
The plan administrator contractor now remits custodial fees directly to
the investment manager at the written direction of the MSRP Board of
Trustees.
Auditor’s Comment: MSRP notes that our analysis is partially factually
accurate, however, the ensuing comments either do not dispute the factual
accuracy of the finding or could not be supported. Specifically, while the
employees do not have system access, as noted in the analysis, they do have the
ability to direct the bank to make a disbursement. MSRP acknowledged that the
custodial bank only required one of the two MSRP employees to provide written
approval to the custodial bank to process transactions, which is consistent with the
first bullet of our analysis.
MSRP further notes that it reviewed monthly and quarterly reports that detailed
all custodial bank account transactions. However, MSRP could not provide
documentation of these reviews despite our numerous requests. Accordingly, we
continue to believe our finding is factually accurate based on the information
MSRP was able to provide during and subsequent to our fieldwork.
Page 8 of 10

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
Audit Services
Finding 4
MSRP did not obtain support to verify the propriety of amounts invoiced by
its accounting firm and could not readily justify an additional $20,000 paid to
the firm for services that were not included in the scope of the contract.
We recommend that MSRP
a. obtain supporting documentation to verify the propriety of billings, as
required in the contract;
b. ensure that contract costs do not exceed the established maximum; and
c. limit payments to activities that are within the scope of the contract.
Agency Response
Analysis FACTUALLY ACCURATE
Please provide The former MSRP employee who served as procurement officer for the
additional comments as audit services task order agreement made the independent decision to
deemed necessary. exceed the maximum audit services task order agreement cost without
consulting the Executive Director. The former MSRP employee who
served as task order agreement monitor did not request the appropriate
documentation from the accounting firm and did not ensure that the
payments that the former MSRP employee approved were for services
within the scope of the task order agreement.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/2026
Please provide details of MSRP has procured a new audit firm with a task order agreement under
corrective action or the State’s Master Contract for Audit Services. The task order agreement
explain disagreement. monitor (Deputy Executive Director & CFO) and the agency Finance
Team will ensure that all audit services invoices are accompanied by the
required supporting documentation prior to being processed, and that
this supporting documentation is retained with each paid invoice.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete -
7/15/2026
Please provide details of The task order agreement monitor and the agency Finance Team will
corrective action or closely monitor all invoices and expenditures and will ensure that all
explain disagreement. task order agreement costs are documented, supported, and within the
parameters of the total task order agreement cost.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete -
7/15/2026
Page 9 of 10

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The task order agreement monitor will ensure that no payments are
corrective action or approved for any activities listed on accounting firm invoices that fall
explain disagreement. outside of the scope of the task order agreement.
Page 10 of 10

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Matusala Y. Abishe
Senior Auditor
Matthew P. Henry
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditors